Winter 2021-2022
Volume 3 Issue 1
50th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations
Between the Republic of Turkey
and the People’s Republic of China
Common Destiny
Shared Future
KAYIHAN KESKİNOK
PAINTING
LIU SHAOBIN
Ambassador of the People's Republic of China to Ankara
Belt & Road Cooperation Marks a New Chapter
On the 50th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations
ABDÜLKADİR EMİN ÖNEN
Ambassador of the Republic ofTurkey in Beijing
The Last Semi-Century and the Future ofTurkish-Chinese
Relations Based on Mutual Respect and Friendship
RİFAT MUTLU
CARTOON
SITKI FIRAT
PHOTOGRAPH
BOOK REVIEW
LI NING
AThousandReaders,
AThousandHamlets
NECATİ DEMİRCAN
RelationsBetweenTurkeyandthe
RepublicofChina(1923-1949)
WANG SANYI
Atatürk’sHalkçılıkandDevletçilik:
AComparisonwithSunYat-sen’s
PoliticalThought
YANG CHEN & XIE FANG
TheMutualConstructionofImageof
ChinaandTurkey
BARIŞ ADIBELLİ
TheEstablishmentofDiplomatic
RelationsBetweentheRepublicof
TurkeyandthePeople’s
RepublicofChina(1960-1971)
POEM
HÜSEYİN HAYDAR
TheAwaitedCall
/briqdergisi
BRIQ is a scholarly journal of international politics, economy,
and culture. The languages of publication are Turkish and English.
Publication Type • Scholarly Journal
Graphic Design • Çiçek İlsever
Editorial Board Coordinator • Assoc. Prof. Efe Can Gürcan, İstinye University
Managing Editor • Ebru Şahin, Dokuz Eylül University
Owner and General Manager
Emine Sağlam on behalf of Turkish-Chinese Business Development and Friendship Association
Printing Management and Distribution • Ajans Gala
+90 (312) 232 10 75 +90 (542) 687 95 58
Editor-in-Chief • Fikret Akfırat
Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
Editors
Necati Demircan, Shanghai University, PhD student • Deniz Eren Erişen, Chinese Academy of Science, PhD student
Orçun Göktürk, University of International Business and Economics, Master's student • Anıl Solmaz, Shanghai University, Master's student
Ahu Yalçın Terzi, Translator • Şafak Terzi, Journalist • Arda Tunçel, Shanghai University, Master's student
Serdar Yurtçiçek, University of International Business and Economics, PhD student
Editorial Board
Mehmet Adnan Akfırat, Turkish-Chinese Business Development and Friendship Association
Latif Bolat, Scholar of Turkish Music and Folklore • Salih Ertan, Electric Engineer
Assoc. Prof. Efe Can Gürcan, İstinye University • Hüseyin Haydar, Poet • Assoc. Prof. Şiir Kılkış, TUBİTAK, METU
Serhat Latifoğlu, Hedge Fund Manager • Assoc. Prof. Uğur Murat Leloğlu, METU
Ali Şahin, İstanbul University • Prof. Dr. Ufuk Tutan • Dr. Hande Günözü Ulusoy • Asst. Prof. Yang Chen, Shanghai University
Advisory Board
Cankut Bagana, Chairman of Onur Air • Prof. Cheng Enfu, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
Prof. Dr. Guo Changgang, The Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences • Prof. Dr. Emin Gürses, Yeditepe University
Assoc. Prof. Han Zhimin, Shanghai International Studies University • Faik Işık, Lawyer • Prof. Dr. Sencer İmer, Ufuk University
Prof. Dr. Birol Kılkış, OSTIM Technical University • Murat Kolbaşı, Chairman of DEIK Turkey-Hong Kong Business Council
Prof. Dr. Semih Koray, Bilkent University • Ethem Sancak, Chairman of ES Investment • Prof. Dr. Sun Degang, Fudan University
Prof. Dr. Yang Guang, Tsinghua University • Wu Keming, Retired Ambassador
Printing • Öztepe Matbaa
Zübeyde Hanım Mah. Kazım Karabekir Cad. Iskitler Özer Han D: 95, 06070 Altındağ/Ankara
ISSN 2687-5896
Editorial Office • Esentepe Mah. Yüzbaşı Kaya Aldoğan Sk. No: 4 İç Kapı No: 209 Şişli-İstanbul
www.briqjournal.com • editor@briqjournal.com
This Journal is indexed in Citefactor.
Kuşak ve Yol Girişimi (KYG) değerlendirilirken, genellikle ekonomik ortaklıklar ve uluslararası
ticaretteki karşılıklı kazanımlar üzerinde durulmaktadır. Gelişen dünya ülkeleri, KYG kapsamında
kurulacak ortaklıklar vasıtasıyla, sürdürülebilir kalkınmayı gerçekleştirmeyi hedeflemektedir. Tüm
bunlar doğrudur ama tek başına bu yönüyle ele almak Girişim’in potansiyelini, hatta şimdiden ulaştığı
sonuçları anlamak bakımından eksiktir.
KYG’nin sihri “paylaşma” kavramında yatmaktadır. Girişim’in temelinde yer alan “paylaşarak
gelişme” ilkesi emperyalizm çağında yepyeni bir ortaklık anlayışını ortaya koymaktadır. Aynı zamanda
alternatif bir uluslararası ilişkiler sistemine giden yolu açmaktadır.
İpek Yolu’nun kalbi Asya’dan yükselen paylaşma çağrısı, ortak tarihimizden güç almakta ve
uygarlıklar beşiği Asya’nın köklerinden süzülüp gelmektedir.
Binlerce yıl boyunca iç içe giren, birbirine karışan İpek Yolu halkları, bugün medeniyetler arasında
çatışma değil uyum, hatta yepyeni bir medeniyet için ayağa kalkmaktadır.
Ölümünün 700’üncü yılında andığımız Yunus Emre, Asya halklarının genlerine işleyen bir anlayışın
temsilcisidir. Asya halklarının ortak yaşam felsefesini temsil eden büyük şairimiz Yunus Emre, 72
milletin harman olduğu Anadolu coğrafyasından yükselen insancıllık, paylaşma, dayanışma ruhunun
sözcüsüdür.
KYG, farklı kültürler arasındaki ilişkide, bir kültürün diğer kültürlerden ileri ya da geri olmadığı,
hepsinin insanlığın ortak değeri olduğu ve paylaştıkça kültürleri geliştirdiği anlayışını temel alıyor.
Farklılıklara hoşgörü ve anlayış ile yaklaşıyor. Bu, son dört yüzyıldır Batılı emperyalistlerin kendileri
dışındaki kültürleri ve onların halklarını aşağı görmelerinden tamamıyla farklı bir anlayış. Bu anlayışın
gelişmesi, Yunus Emre’nin 700 yıl öncesinden muştusunu verdiği “yeryüzü cenneti”ni kurmanın da
anahtarı.
İnsan eliyle yapılan en sağlam yapılar yıkılabilir ama halkın tarih içinde biriktirdiği kültürü
silmek, yok etmek mümkün değildir. Sümerli şairlerden, Çin’in Konfüçyüs’üne, Anadolu’nun Yunus
Emre’sinden, Hindistan’ın Kabir’ine, Arapların, Farsların ve Türklerin Fuzuli'sine uzanan daha nice halk
bilgesinin soluğu tüm dünyada gönülleri tutuşturmaya devam etmektedir.
Paylaşma, aynı dertlere sahip toplumların kardeşlik ve yol arkadaşlığını, giderek gönül birliğini
gerektirir. Gönüller bir olacak ki, ortak üretilebilsin ve paylaşılabilsin. Bu, aynı dertlere sahip toplumların
zorlukları da paylaşmasını gerektiren ortak bir mücadeledir.
Kuşak ve Yol Girişimi’nde sadece karayolları, deniz ve demiryolları değil, gönüller arasında da
köprü kurulması ihtiyacı bulunmaktadır.
Gelişen dünyadan başlayarak tüm dünya halklarının kardeş/yoldaş olduğu, insan ve doğa
arasındaki uyumu gerçekleştirecek uygarlık için gönül köprüsü…
H H H
Türkiye’nin seçkin sanayicilerinden, dergimizin Danışma Kurulu üyesi Sayın Selim Yaşar hayatını
kaybetti. İş dünyasının üretken temsilcisi ve Türkiye’nin sorunlarına çözüm üreten seçkin bir entelektüel
olarak, kuruluş toplantısından itibaren BRIQ çalışmalarına katılan Sayın Yaşar’ın ani ölümü nedeniyle
üzgünüz. Ailesine, sevenlerine ve dostlarına başsağlığı diliyoruz.
At a time when US ambitions for a unipolar world or-
der have lost their appeal, a new order is taking shape thanks
to the multipolarization of world politics and the accelera-
tion of cooperation between developing countries, rejecting
the globalism of imperialist states. Under these conditions,
the new agenda of global cooperation should respond to
the needs and aspirations of developing countries seeking
joint development and solidarity under the guidance of pub-
lic-driven projects. In particular, the Belt and Road Initiative
(BRI) -put forward in 2013 by Xi Jinping, President of the
People's Republic of China- provides a suitable opportunity
and a sound foundation for the implementation of this new
agenda of global cooperation.
BRI is an epoch-making move to re-implement the
concept of the Silk Road, which dates back 2,000 years, to
a time when China was immensely contributing to global
prosperity and the development of trade and cooperation.
The revival of this concept entails a much more comprehen-
sive approach that also incorporates rail and sea transport,
and digital systems.
BRI proposes to bring together over 60 countries across
Asia, Europe, Africa, and Latin America –together account-
ing for nearly half of the world’s gross domestic product– for
prosperity and development at the initiative of China. Unlike
the Western-centered world order, BRI seeks peaceful collab-
oration for improving global trade and production towards
common goals for humanity. It firmly rejects crude imperi-
alist exploitation. Two thousand years ago, the Silk Road was
a conduit for the flow of gunpowder, spices, silk, compasses
and paper to the world. Today, it offers artificial intelligence,
quantum computers, new energy and material technologies,
and space-age visions to developing countries. In addition,
the New Silk Road provides incentives and opportunities
for the development and implementation of bio-economic
schemes in stakeholder countries against the threat of cli-
mate change and other environmental threats that bring the
entire ecosystem to the brink of extinction.
Turkey has a significant role –real and potential– in ac-
celerating South-South cooperation. Turkey is conveniently
located as Asia’s farthest outpost to the West. It assumes a
critical position as a pivotal country on BRI’s North-South
and East-West axes. However, China's development and
BRI’s contribution to the future of humanity have remained
to a large extent underrecognized and superficially evaluat-
ed in Turkish academia, media, and politics. This is mainly
because Turkey’s academics, media professionals, and policy
makers have been observing China using Western sources.
In the same manner, China and BRI’s other potential part-
ners have been viewing Turkey through a Western lens.
BRIQ has committed itself to developing an in-depth
understanding of the present era, with a particular emphasis
on the new opportunities and obstacles on the road to the
New Asian Century.
BRIQ assumes the task of providing direct exchange of
views and information among Chinese and Turkish academ-
ics, intellectuals, and policy makers. In the meantime, this
journal will serve as a platform to bring together the intellec-
tual accumulation of the whole world, especially developing
countries, on the basis of the Belt and Road Initiative, which
presents a historic opportunity for the common future of
humanity.
BRIQ is also devoted to publishing research and other
intellectual contributions that underline the transformative
power of public-driven economies, where popular interests
are upheld as the basic principle, ahead of individual profit.
The fundamental tasks of BRIQ are to demonstrate how BRI
can contribute to the implementation of this public-driven
model, and to help potential BRI partners -including Tur-
key- to realize their real potential.
BRIQ stands for the unity of humanity and a fair world
order. It will therefore be a publication for the world’s distin-
guished intellectuals, especially those from Eurasia, Africa,
and the Americas: the defenders of a new civilization ris-
ing from Asia on the basis of peace, fraternity, cooperation,
prosperity, social benefit and common development.
BRIQ features a broad range of content, from academic
articles to book reviews, review essays, interviews, news re-
ports, and feature articles.
The Editorial Board can issue calls for papers for spe-
cial issues and invite authors to contribute manuscripts;
however, it also welcomes unsolicited submissions.
Submissions are invited in English or Turkish. All sub-
missions are to include a short biography (150-word limit)
and should be sent as Microsoft Word attachments to briq@
briqjournal.com Articles or other content that have been
previously published or are under review by other journals
will not be considered for publication.
BRIQ follows American Psychology Association (APA
style, 6th
edition, https://www.apastyle.org) and uses Ameri-
can English spelling.
BRIQ applies a double-blind review process for all ac-
ademic articles.
Academic articles should be between 5000 and 9000
words in length, including abstracts, notes, references, and
all other content. Please supply a cover page that includes
complete author information, and a fully anonymized man-
uscript that also contains an abstract (200-word limit) and
five keywords.
Book reviews should not exceed 1,000 words; review
essays covering two or more works can be up to 3,000 words.
News reports consisting of brief analyses of news devel-
opments should not exceed 1,500 words; feature articles com-
bining reporting and analysis can be up to 3,500 words.
PleasecontacttheEditorialBoardforinterviewproposals.
Principles of Publication
The peoples of Asia have taken their place on the stage of history as the hosts of a rising civilization in the
21st century, where the values of labor, humanism, solidarity, and sharing are being rediscovered in the face of a
decaying Atlantic. The rise of the peoples of Asia against imperialist aggression will play a decisive role not only in
their own regions but also in the future of the entire world.
China at the eastern end and Turkey at the western end of our continent are the two leading countries of the
Asian civilization. Under current conditions, the interests of Turkey and China are closely intertwined.
Both countries face similar national security threats. Moreover, the source of the threat is the same. Both
countries are the target of imperialist aggression, as they were at the beginning of the 20th century. The United
States (US) administration has declared China, Russia, and rising nationalisms in the developing world as national
security threats. In line with this decision, the US targets Turkey as well as China, because they reject the yoke
of imperialism and defend their rights and interests with an armed determination in matters concerning national
interests.
Turkey is located in Western Asia, where today’s geopolitical power struggles are concentrated. It is fighting
the armed threats posed by the US in Cyprus, the Eastern Mediterranean, Syria, and Iraq. This is reminiscent of the
kind of threats that China is facing in the South China Sea and the Taiwan Strait. In addition, eliminating US-backed
separatist terrorism is among the national security priorities of both countries. The US feeds and supports terrorist
organizations to divide Syria, Iran, Iraq, and Turkey as well as China.
Certainly, the most important area of partnership for both countries is the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). The
BRI creates a unique opportunity for Turkey, which today wants to step out of the global financial hegemony and
head towards a “production revolution”. Likewise, Turkey offers a window of opportunity for China and other BRI
countries as a crucial jumping-off point for the BRI’s expansion into Europe, Southwest Asia, and North Africa.
In summary, if Turkey wins, China will win; if China loses, Turkey will lose. It follows that China and Turkey will
rise together.
China and Turkey are obliged to be companions as the leading countries of a humane and nature-centered
common future that will save humanity from imperialist aggression, the nature from destruction, and societies from
decay. The star of the shared future, which will be formed by those whose destinies are common, has already begun
to shine.
***
With our last issue, BRIQ has completed its 2nd year. With its original design, qualified content, scientific
depth of its articles, and authors from different countries, we have produced 8 issues that are worthy of our claims
that we announced in the first issue. Our contributors include academics from leading universities in countries such
as China, Turkey, Russia, Iran, Mexico, Australia, Egypt, Syria, Italy, and Germany. Our first eight issues included 59
peer-reviewed articles, essays, interviews, and book reviews. In addition, BRIQ featured photographs, paintings,
and cartoons of the world's leading artists to contribute to cultural interactions between peoples. To date, the total
number of citations of articles featured in BRIQ has reached 32 and since May, BRIQ has been listed on Citefactor,
one of the leading international indices. In the coming months, BRIQ will be included in other international indices.
As we enter our third year, as BRIQ we reiterate our call to the academics, experts, and intellectuals of the
developing world, especially those in Turkey and China:
BRIQ, which is a powerful tool in breaking the Atlanticist academic domination and enriching the content of
the new international order, is your journal, too! Let's strengthen it together with your contributions!
Editor-in-Chief
FİKRET AKFIRAT
The Truth Revealed on the 50th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations:
China and Turkey Will Rise Together
EDıtorıal
YANG CHEN • XIE FANG
WANG SANYI
ABDÜLKADİR EMİN ÖNEN
(Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey in Beijing)
NECATİ DEMİRCAN
LIU SHAOBIN
(Ambassador of the People's Republic of China to Ankara )
06-10
16-25
40-49
26-39
12-15
The Mutual Construction of
Image of China and Turkey
Atatürk’s Halkçılık and Devletçilik:
A Comparison with Sun Yat-sen’s Political
Thought
The Last Semi-Century and the Future
of Turkish-Chinese Relations Based on
Mutual Respect and Friendship
Relations Between Turkey and the
Republic of China (1923-1949)
Belt & Road Cooperation Marks a New
Chapter On the 50th Anniversary of
Diplomatic Relations
50-73
BARIŞ ADIBELLİ
The Establishment of
Diplomatic Relations
Between the Republic of
Turkey and the
People’s Republic of
China (1960-1971)
76-82
ANIL SOLMAZ
The Sinology and
Chinese Studies Symposium:
A brand-new unifying
perspective of Chinese
Studies in Turkey
86-89
LI NING
A Thousand Readers,
A Thousand Hamlets:
A Chinese Scholar’s Response
to the Ten Hot Issues about the
Belt & Road Initiative
93 PAINTING
RİFAT MUTLU
95 CARTOON
94 PHOTOGRAPH
BOOK REVIEW
SITKI RIFAT
74
HÜSEYİN HAYDAR
The Awaited Call
POEM REPORT
83-85
ARDA TUNÇEL
Building the shared
future of humanity through sports:
Towards the 2022 Winter
Olympics Forum
REPORT
KAYIHAN KESKİNOK
AMBASSADOR OF
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY IN BEIJING
ABDULKADİR EMİN ÖNEN
Abdulkadir Emin Önen was born in Ankara on 15 March 1976. He completed his undergraduate
education in Public Administration at Istanbul Fatih University, Faculty of Economics and
Administrative Sciences in 2001. He received his master’s degree in Political Science from the
Fatih University in 2010. His dissertation is entitled “Asian Perception in Turkish Foreign Policy
since 2003”. He established his own consulting company in import and export business in China/
Guangzhou. He was elected as Member of Parliament from Şanlıurfa for the 23rd and 24th
Parliamentary Terms, Justice and Development Party. He served as Vice-President of the Asian
Parliamentary Assembly (APA) in 2009-2011. He was the Chairman of Turkey-China Inter-
Parliamentary Friendship Group and President of Turkish Group at Parliamentary Assembly
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE PA) between 2011 and
2015. He also served as Vice-President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the International
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE PA) between 2013 and 2015.
Mr. Önen serves as Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey to the People’s Republic of China.
How to cite: Liu, S. (2021/2022). Belt and Road cooperation marks a new chapter on the 50th anniversary
of diplomatic relations between China and Turkey. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 6-10.
7
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY AND THE
people’ s Republic of China are the heirs of
two ancient civilizations at the two ends of
the Silk Road. This year, we celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the establishment of diploma-
tic relations (1971) between the two states. In
fact, 50 years is a very short period of time,
considering the deep-rooted history of both
civilizations and their interaction dating back
to many millennia. However, the momentum
gained especially since 2010, when our rela-
tions were upgraded to the level of “strategic
cooperation”, is remarkable.
At this point, I would especially like to
emphasize that I am honored and glad to be
representing Turkey since 1 December 2017
– the day I assumed my duty as the Ambas-
sador of the Republic of Turkey – in the most
populous country of the world and in such a
historical capital as Beijing.
In this vein, I am pleased to clearly ob-
serve that the bilateral relations between the
two countries in various fields from economy
to trade, and from tourism to collaboration
in joint transportation projects have visibly
improved in recent years, the contacts at all
levels and sectors have intensified, and our
cooperation on regional and global issues as
THE LAST SEMI-CENTURY AND
THE FUTURE OF TURKISH-CHINESE
RELATIONS BASED ON
MUTUAL RESPECT AND FRIENDSHIP
Article by H.E. A. Emin Önen,
Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey in Beijing,
Written to Be Published on the Special Issue of the BRIQ*
28.10.2021
*Spots have been added by BRIQ.
8
well as our bilateral relations has been stren-
gthened. It is quite normal in the course of
history for these two dynamic powerhouses,
which have achieved a significant progress
on their paths of development, to cooperate
even more. However, despite the breakthrou-
ghs observed in almost every field in the last
decade, the volume and level of our relations
are still far from reflecting their true potenti-
al. This fact requires consideration and more
effort.
Undoubtedly, diplomacy pursued at the
leaders level plays an important role in main-
taining the momentum in our rapidly deve-
loping bilateral relations and in coordinating
our approaches towards complex regional
and global challenges. H.E. President Erdo-
ğan and H.E. President Xi held regular con-
sultations by phone calls throughout the year.
They have exchanged views on regional and
global challenges, while continuing to make
joint decisions on issues of common interest.
It is obvious that the close dialogue between
the two leaders will guide raising the profile
of Turkish-Chinese strategic cooperation in
the years to come. As a matter of fact, the visit
of Foreign Minister H.E. Wang to Turkey in
March 2021 and the meetings of H.E. Foreign
Minister Çavuşoğlu and Mr. Wang in Tash-
kent last July also pointed to this situation,
and have been very beneficial for Turkey and
China to better understand each other’s pers-
pective on important international issues.
Turkish-Chinese cooperation has proven
to be based on solid foundations, especially
in difficult times. Turkey was one of the first
countries to provide much-needed medi-
cal supplies to China at the beginning of the
Covid-19 outbreak in Wuhan; and when the
virus started to spread in Turkey in the midd-
le of 2020, this time China responded in the
same way. Afterwards, the Covid-19 vaccine
“CoronaVac” produced in China, was used
and continues to be used for millions of our
citizens in our national vaccination campa-
ign.
Despite the non-disappearance of the
pandemic from our lives, and the consequent
international travel restrictions and many ot-
her challenges, my colleagues at the Embassy
and I, are trying our best to advance the posi-
tive agenda of our bilateral cooperation, par-
ticularly in the areas of culture and economy.
In line with this understanding, in last
May, we inaugurated Yunus Emre Institute’s
59th branch in the world and the first center
in China, in Beijing, in one of the world’s le-
ading cultural capitals. It is our pleasure that
our Chinese friends show great interest in
this center, which plays an important role for
both communities to get to know each other
better.
On the other hand, we are also prepa-
ring to open our fourth Consulate General
in China in Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan
province. So, after Beijing, Hong Kong, Shan-
ghai and Guangzhou, we will be represented
in another rapidly developing and important
region of China.
We are determined to revitalize our pe-
ople to people relations as soon as possible,
Turkish-Chinesecooperationhasproven
tobebasedonsolidfoundations,
especiallyindifficulttimes.
9
which were interrupted by the pandemic. Re-
suming the reciprocal flights, whose number
was close to 50 per week in the pre-pandemic
period, increasing the number of flights and
the diversification of the destinations would
also elevate the number of Chinese tourists
– which reached a record-high level by inc-
reasing to almost 600,000 in 2019 – visiting
our country and assist us in reaching our tar-
get of “1 million Chinese tourists annually”.
Facilitating mutual visits would also pave the
way for renewed educational and academic
contacts.
In 2020, our bilateral trade reached the
record level of approximately 26 billion Dol-
lars, making China the second largest trading
partner of Turkey.
On the other hand, we put great effort
into keeping the economic and commercial
ties between our countries as dynamic as pos-
sible. In 2020, our bilateral trade reached the
record level of approximately 26 billion Dol-
lars, making China the second largest trading
partner of Turkey. In line with our aim to sta-
bilize the deficit in our bilateral trade, we are
also taking important steps to increase our
exports to China. In this context, in the first
8 months of 2021, our exports to China inc-
reased by 45% compared to the same period
of the previous year and reached 2.4 billion
Dollars. Turkey’s exports of food and agricul-
tural products to China increased by 112% in
the first eight months of this year, reaching
230 million Dollars. We aim that our exports
to China reach the highest level in our his-
tory by the end of 2021. We also continue to
work on our plans to integrate Turkish export
products into China’s major e-commerce
platforms to seize the opportunity offered by
the new digital economies. In parallel, we en-
courage more Chinese origin investments in
Turkey. I see no obstacles to doubling or even
tripling our trade volume and mutual invest-
ments with the right planning, determination
and sincere cooperation.
We attach great importance to our rela-
tions with China also within the framework
of our “Asia Anew” initiative, which was la-
unched in 2019 and aims to deepen Turkey’s
relations with Asian countries and contribute
to economic integration across the continent.
In this vein, transportation corridors are
of critical importance. Our countries, whi-
ch are the natural heirs of the historical Silk
Road, share the vision of integration through
Eurasia through comprehensive connectivity
projects such as the “Middle Corridor” and
the “Belt and Road Initiative”. As a part of this
shared vision and as a tangible result of our
intense efforts to harmonize these two am-
bitious projects, the first export freight train
service from Turkey to China was launched
in December 2020. The train reached Xi’an
from Istanbul in just 12 days, following the
Trans-Caspian East-West Central Corridor
via the Kars-Tbilisi-Baku railway. Efforts are
underway to increase the number of these
freight trains in the upcoming period. Gre-
Ourcountries,whicharethenatural
heirsofthehistoricalSilkRoad,share
thevisionofintegrationthroughEurasia
throughcomprehensiveconnectivity
projectssuchasthe“MiddleCorridor”
andthe“BeltandRoadInitiative”
.
10
10
ater use of this rail link will enable Turkish
and Chinese products to be delivered to their
respective destinations more easily and qui-
ckly and will also make a great contribution
to eliminating the ongoing vulnerabilities in
global supply chains.
The importance of the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region of the People’s Repub-
lic of China for the Belt and Road Initiative
is enormous with its logistics, economic and
cultural dimensions. A significant part of the
Uyghur Turks, who are one of the essential
elements of the Belt and Road geography, live
in Turkey. Therefore, we attach special impor-
tance that the Uyghurs and the other Turkic
peoples living in China, with whom we have
undeniable linguistic, religious, historical and
cultural ties, live in peace, security and pros-
perity as equal citizens, fully enjoying their
rights arising from national and international
law, develop and transfer their culture to new
generations, make the best use of the deve-
lopment of the region and hence contribute to
our relations with China. In our contacts with
the Chinese side, we regularly discuss the is-
sues that we believe need more effort in this
regard, especially the ones related to Turkish
citizens. I believe that the establishment of a
constructive and result-oriented dialogue on
this matter, as in other aspects of our bilateral
relations, will positively affect our relations.
To summarize, the strong mutual politi-
cal will to develop our relations, manifested
especially in the last fifteen years, has been
further strengthened by intense high-level
political contacts, and paved the way for our
cooperation in many areas. It has been pro-
ven in the turbulent environment created by
the pandemic that our bilateral ties are built
on strong foundations. Increasing high-level
engagement at the political level and strengt-
hening social contacts in many fields such as
tourism, culture, civil aviation, science and
technology give us strong clues that the next
half century will be much more valuable for
Turkey and China. Therefore, as we celebrate
the semicentennial anniversary of our diplo-
matic relations, we should plan and gradually
put into practice the foundations of the steps
to be determined in the light of the “win-win”
principle, which will ensure the further dee-
pening of the ties between our two countries
in the next 50 years.
Doubtlessly, it is not possible for any
country to traverse the road to a prosperous
future alone. With this understanding, I ful-
ly believe that our relations will be carried
forward in the future in line with the interests
of the people of the two countries. The dee-
pening and development of our relations will
not only be beneficial for the welfare and de-
velopment of the people of the two countries,
but also contribute to the peace, stability and
development of the region and the world.
Wecelebratethesemicentennial
anniversaryofourdiplomaticrelations,
weshouldplanandgraduallyputinto
practicethefoundationsofthestepsto
bedeterminedinthelightofthe
“win-win”principle,whichwillensure
thefurtherdeepeningoftheties
betweenourtwocountriesinthenext50
years.
11
AMBASSADOR OF THE PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA TO ANKARA
LIU SHAOBIN
Liu Shaobin was born in 1963. Since 1985, Mr. Liu has been working for the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of China. Respectively, he served as Counsellor and Director of the
Department of Asian Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, Minister
Counsellor at the Chinese Embassy in the Republic of Korea, Deputy Director-General of the
Department of External Security Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, Minister
at the Chinese Embassy in Japan, and General Director of the Department of External
Security Affairs. He serves as Chinese Ambassador to Turkey since October 2020.
How to cite: Liu, S. (2021/2022). Belt and Road cooperation marks a new chapter on the 50th anniversary
of diplomatic relations between China and Turkey. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 12-15.
13
THE YEAR 2021 MARKS THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY
of diplomatic relations between China and Tur-
key. Over this period, thanks to the joint efforts
of the governments and people of the two count-
ries, China-Turkey relations have overcome nu-
merous international challenges and entered a
mature and stable stage of development. Espe-
cially since establishing a strategic cooperative
relationship in 2010, cooperation between the
two countries in fields such as politics, economy,
people-to-people exchanges, culture, science and
technology has developed rapidly.
Growing mutual political trust between
China and Turkey has provided a solid guaran-
tee for further deepening bilateral relations. The
two countries’ leaders have always planned and
grasped China-Turkey relations from a strategic
and long-term perspective. The two countries
firmly support each other in safeguarding their
national sovereignty, independence and terri-
torial integrity and in pursuing a development
path in line with their own national conditions.
In recent years, under the leadership of Presi-
dent Xi Jinping and President Recep Tayyip Er-
dogan, bilateral relations have been consistently
improving, as marked by a consensus on mutual
respect for each other’s core interests and major
concerns. For the 50th anniversary of diplomatic
relations, the two leaders had a telephone call and
conveyed congratulatory messages to each other,
positively evaluated the achievements of bilateral
cooperation in various fields, and determined the
direction of development of bilateral relations for
the new period.
In March 2021, Wang Yi, State Councilor
and Minister of Foreign Affairs, visited Turkey.
Chinese and Turkish foreign ministers extensi-
vely exchanged views on promoting the healthy
and stable development of the strategic coopera-
tive relationship between China and Turkey.
The fruitful results of pragmatic cooperation
between China and Turkey have provided signi-
ficant benefits for the people of both countries.
China-Turkey cooperation in areas of trade, in-
BELT AND ROAD COOPERATION
MARKS A NEW CHAPTER ON THE
50TH ANNIVERSARY OF DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS BETWEEN
CHINA AND TURKEY
*Spots have been added by BRIQ.
14
vestment and finance is progressing steadily.
China has become Turkey’s second-largest tra-
ding partner as it has actively taken a series of
measures to increase imports from Turkey. Hi-
gh-quality Turkish agricultural products such as
cherries, pistachios, dairy, aquatic and poultry
have been welcomed by Chinese consumers.
Between January and September 2021, bilateral
trade volume increased by 44.1% to reach $24.49
billion, and China’s non-financial direct invest-
ment in Turkey reached $160 million with an
annual increase of 647.9% compared to the pre-
vious year. Financial cooperation between China
and Turkey has deepened further, and the scale
of local currency swaps has reached 35 billion
yuan.
In just a few years of entering the Turkish
market, Bank of China and Industrial and Com-
mercial Bank of China have provided tens of
billions of dollars of financing support for jo-
int projects and local projects between the two
countries. China and Turkey are actively explo-
ring new ideas and measures to optimize their
trade structure and enhance their economic and
trade cooperation in order to seize the opportu-
nities of the development of the digital economy
and fully release the potential of cooperation
between the two countries in the areas of trade
in services, digital economy and e-commerce.
People-to-people and cultural exchanges
between China and Turkey, which are becoming
increasingly close, have prepared a solid pub-
lic base for friendship. China and Turkey have
a long history of friendship and the ancient Silk
Road represents a bridge for communication and
exchange between the two civilizations for thou-
sands years. Since establishing diplomatic rela-
tions, people-to-people and cultural exchanges
between China and Turkey continue to expand.
The two countries have concluded 26 pairs of sis-
ter provinces or sister cities, and thanks to acti-
vities such as the Year of Culture and the Year of
Tourism, people from each country know each
other better than ever. The Yunus Emre Turkish
Cultural Center was officially opened in Beijing,
while China opened 4 Confucius Institutes in
Turkey, becoming a window for Turkish people
to learn Chinese and Chinese culture. China and
Turkey also have more than ten universities offe-
ring courses in the other’s language.
In the face of the Covid-19 outbreak, China
and Turkey have stood by other and overcome
existing difficulties together and have carried
out active and fruitful close cooperation in pro-
viding anti-epidemic materials and sharing ex-
perience in fighting the pandemic. China’s Sino-
vac has cumulatively provided a large number of
vaccines to Turkey at its most urgent moment,
accumulating more than 70 million doses, whi-
ch has greatly helped Turkey fight the pandemic
and created a new highlight for China-Turkey
relations.
The process of harmonizing the develop-
ment strategies of China and Turkey has reached
a high point in the process of high-quality joint
construction of the Belt and Road. Turkey is one
of the first countries to support the joint const-
ruction of the Belt and Road. President Erdoğan,
who attended the first Belt and Road Forum for
International Cooperation, emphasized in his
opening speech that the Belt and Road Initiative
is a bridge of friendship that will accelerate the
development of Turkey-China relations. In No-
vember 2015, President Xi Jinping and President
Erdoğan witnessed the signing of the memoran-
dum of understanding between the two govern-
ments during the G20 Antalya summit to align
the Belt and Road Initiative and the “Middle
TheancientSilkRoadrepresentsa
bridgeforcommunicationandexchange
betweenthetwocivilizationsfor
thousandsofyears.
15
Corridor” strategy. This has been a driving force
for the two countries to deepen their mutually
beneficial cooperation and share the benefits,
and marks a new chapter in the deep-rooted
friendship between China and Turkey, which
began with the ancient Silk Road. In July 2021,
President Xi Jinping, in a phone call with Presi-
dent Erdoğan, reiterated that China and Turkey
will strengthen the alignment of the Belt and
Road Initiative and the “Middle Corridor” stra-
tegy, pointing the way for the two countries to
further deepen cooperation and promote com-
mon development.
Cooperation between the two countries
for the joint construction of the Belt and Road
has yielded productive results. For example, the
China-Europe Freight Train “Chang’an” conne-
cting China’s Xi’an to Turkey’s Istanbul, opened
regular traffic in both directions. This “Iron Silk
Road”, which spans across the Asian continent
from one end to the other, has re-connected
China and Turkey and ensured the rapid circu-
lation of goods between the two. Turkey’s Kum-
port Port plays an important role in the Belt and
Road. After a consortium of Chinese companies
bought 65% of the port, the original Turkish
team remained completely in place, a local ma-
nagement model continued, and the container
capacity and revenues of the port gradually inc-
reased.
Industrial development of the two countries
in such areas as infrastructure and renewable
energy is constantly being harmonized. Chine-
se companies are implementing mega-projects
such as the Ankara-Istanbul High Speed Ra-
ilway Phase II Project, the Ankara 500MW
Photovoltaic Industrial Park and the Tuz Gölü
Underground Natural Gas Storage Project.
Construction of the Hunutlu Thermal Power
Plant, China’s largest Belt and Road project in
Turkey, is progressing smoothly. All of these
projects have created a large number of local
jobs. Huawei has established the second largest
R&D center abroad in Turkey, while smartp-
hone brands such as Xiaomi, Vivo, Oppo, and
white goods giant Haier have also invested in
factories in the country, contributing to Turkey’s
technological development and innovation.
The year 2021 marks the 100th anniver-
sary of the founding of the Communist Party of
China (CPC). Xi Jinping, General Secretary of
the CPC Central Committee, proudly declared
at the Party’s centenary ceremony that we have
realized the first centenary goal and are marc-
hing in confident strides toward the second cen-
tenary goal, which aims to realize the vision of
a great modern socialist country in all respects.
The Turkish people have also put forward “Visi-
on 2023-2053” and are making efforts to realize
the “2023 Goals”.
As China and Turkey realize their great dre-
ams, the two countries will face more opportu-
nities and broader space for development. Stan-
ding at a historical starting point, we hope that
China and Turkey will understand and respect
each other’s core interests and major concerns,
strengthen mutual political trust and strategic
cooperation, manage contradictions and diffe-
rences appropriately, protect the political foun-
dation of bilateral relations together, extensively
explore intersection points of interest, achieve
new fruits in pragmatic cooperation in various
fields by accelerating the high-quality joint cons-
truction of the Belt and Road, and make intense
efforts for developing China-Turkey strategic co-
operative relationship and building a community
with a shared future for mankind.
“IronSilkRoad”
,whichspansacross
theAsiancontinentfromoneendto
theother,hasre-connectedChinaand
Turkeyandensuredtherapidcirculation
ofgoodsbetweenthetwo.
The Mutual Construction of Image of
China and Turkey:
Perceptions, Problems, and Policy
Proposals*
*Dr. Yang Chen is Assistant Professor in the Department of History of Shanghai University’s College of
Liberal Arts and Executive Director of the Centre for Turkish Studies at Shanghai University. He has
published two books about Turkey and several papers in journals such as Critical Sociology, Sociology
of Islam, Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, Arab World Research, and more. His main areas of research
are Islamic movements in Turkey, party politics in Turkey, Turkey’s foreign policy, and China-Turkey
relations.
E-mail: ycwf2008@163.com
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4840-642
**Xie Fang is a master’s candidate majoring in World History in the College of Liberal Arts and
a research assistant of the Center for Turkish Studies at Shanghai University. Her research fields
include the early history of Republic of Turkey and Turkey-Greece Relations.
Yang Chen*
Asst. Prof.
Department of History,
Shanghai University, China
Peer-Reviewed Article
Master Candidate
Department of World History, College of Liberal Arts
Shanghai University, China
XIE FANG**
How to cite: Yang, C & Xie, F. (2021/2022). The mutual construction of image of China and Turkey:
Perceptions, problems, and policy proposals. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 16-25.
17
Yang Chen - Xie Fang - The Mutual Construction of Image of China and Turkey: Perceptions, Problems, and Policy Proposals
ABSTRACT
Since establishing the strategic cooperative relationship between China and Turkey in 2010, bilateral
relations have entered a new era with more political mutual trust, economic cooperation, and cultural
exchanges compared with the previous 40 years. However, in contrast to frequent official contacts,
ordinary people’s views on each country have not kept pace with this new development. In the eyes of the
Turks, the image of China is still linked to some negative events. Due to several historical reasons, China’s
understanding of Turkey remains at a superficial level. If Chinese and Turkish people become closer
emotionally and understand each other more, then the two countries’ images will significantly improve,
and China-Turkish relations will inevitably strengthen.
Keywords: China Studies, China-Turkey Relations, Image of China; Image of Turkey, Turkish Studies
2020 AND ITS AFTERMATH HAVE BEEN AN
important period for Chinese and Turkish history
and the development of their bilateral relations. 2020
marksthe10thanniversaryoftheestablishmentofthe
China-Turkey strategic partnership. Furthermore,
2021 marks the 50th anniversary of diplomatic
relations between China and Turkey and the 100th
anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party
of China. In 2023, Turkey will have seen a century
since its founding. Facing the COVID-19 pandemic
and its unprecedented negative consequences, China
and Turkey are constantly struggling to realize their
“Chinese Dream” and “Turkish Dream”, respectively.
They both strive to choose an independent road.
Moreover, Turkey and China also share similar
views on their respective development strategies,
exemplified in their mutual synergy for improving
the cooperation between the “Belt & Road” Initiative
and the “Middle Corridor” Project. China attaches
great importance to Turkey’s increasing role in
regional and global affairs, while Turkey is also very
supportive of China’s rise (Colakoglu, 2014). This
completely contrasts the suspicion, criticism, and
even containment of the development of China and
Turkey by Western countries.
Since the strategic cooperative relationship
between China and Turkey was established in 2010,
bilateral relations have entered a new era with more
political mutual trust, economic cooperation, and
cultural exchanges compared with the previous
40 years (Chen, 2020). However, in contrast to
frequent official contacts, ordinary people’s views
on each country have not kept pace with this new
development. In the Turks' eyes, China's image is still
connected with negative events, and Japan and South
Korea's positive image in Turkey are still way ahead
of that of China. Due to historical reasons, China’s
understanding of Turkey is not sufficient either. The
construction of the “Belt and Road” Initiative mainly
addresses connectivity in policy, infrastructure,
trade, finance, and people-to-people exchange.
Arguably, the “people-to-people exchange” is the
most important basis for developing relations
between the two countries. As an old Chinese saying
goes, “Friendship, which derives from close contact
between the people, holds the key to sound state-
to-state relations”. If Chinese and Turkish people
become closer emotionally and understand each
other more, then the two countries’ images of each
other will significantly improve, and China-Turkish
relations will inevitably strengthen.
This article is structured as follows. The first part
analyses current developments in the Sino-Turkish
strategic cooperative relationship since 2010 based
on a macro-level. The second part describes the
image of China in the eyes of the Turkish people
18
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
and the image of Turkey in the eyes of the Chinese
people. The third part explores the possible reasons
behind these diverging perceptions. The article will
conclude with a section that proposes suggestions
on how to improve the image of each other.
The Status Quo Development of
China-Turkey Relations
Since 2010, the development of China-Turkey
relations can be roughly divided into three stages.
The first stage is from establishing the strategic
partnership in 2010 to the attempted military coup
in 2016. The main feature of China-Turkish relations
at this stage was “two steps forward and one step
backwards”. Although China and Turkey held the
“Chinese Culture Year” (2012) and the “Turkish
Culture Year” (2013) in each other’s countries at
this stage, relations deteriorated in 2014 and 2015
following violent terrorist incidents in Xinjiang.
During this period, the Turkish side was hesitant
towards further development of China-Turkey
relations, and the main driving force of the bilateral
relations was the Chinese side.
The second stage is from the attempted military
coup in 2016 to February 2019. The main feature
of this stage was that “misfortune tests the sincerity
of friends”. On August 3-6, 2016, the Chinese
Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Ming visited Turkey
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China, 2016). On April 18-20, 2017, the Chinese
Vice Premier Liu Yandong visited Turkey (Yang
& Chun, 2017). Both visits were conducted when
Turkey was under difficult circumstances and
were regarded by Turkey as supporting its national
sovereignty and unity. Subsequently, President
Erdogan attended the Hangzhou G20 Summit
on September 3rd 2016. In May 2017, President
Erdogan participated in the First Belt and Road
Forum for International Cooperation hosted in
Beijing and delivered a keynote speech. This series of
interactions reflects both the importance that China
attaches to Turkey and Turkey’s trust in China.
China-Turkey relations are normalizing thanks to the leadership of the two heads of state. (United World, 2019)
19
Yang Chen - Xie Fang - The Mutual Construction of Image of China and Turkey: Perceptions, Problems, and Policy Proposals
The third stage is from February 2019 onwards.
The main feature of this stage is “go forward with
caution”. On February 9th 2019, the Turkish
Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesperson stated
that the Chinese government had established a
“concentration camp” in Xinjiang to imprison
one million Uyghurs. They accused the Chinese
government of seriously infringing on the human
rights of the Uyghurs and other Muslims by trying
to “eliminate” their race, religion, and culture
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China, 2019). This makes Turkey the first country
in the Islamic world to criticize China on Xinjiang-
related issues, which has aroused great attention
from international media.
China and Turkey’s relations are like a seesaw
when following this series of events. The outbreak of
the July 5th Incident in 2009 caused the deterioration
of Sino-Turkish relations. On that day, a serious
wave of violent crime of beating, smashing, looting,
and burning occurred in Urumqi, Xinjiang. Many
innocent people and policy officers were killed or
injured, many vehicles were burnt down, and many
shops were smashed and burned. However, the
reaction from Turkey was not to blame the violent
terrorists but criticize China’s Xinjiang policy.
Fortunately, in the next year, the two countries
managed to reduce the influence of this event and
establish a strategic cooperative relationship. In July
2015, however, an anti-China demonstration broke
out in Turkey. Following President Erdogan’s visit to
China at the end of July, relations between the two
countries returned to normal.
After the unsuccessful military coup in Turkey
broke out in 2016, China-Turkey relations have
further developed, and a consensus has been reached
on issues such as anti-terrorism. In February 2019,
the Turkish Foreign Ministry’s accusation of China’s
Xinjiang policy again led to a crisis in Sino-Turkish
relations. However, with President Erdogan’s visit to
China in July, bilateral relations returned to normal
again.
Evidently, the lack of political mutual trust is
still the crux of developing Sino-Turkish relations,
meaning that, whenever such issues break out, the
political relations between the two countries become
turbulent. However, thanks to the leadership of
the two heads of state, China-Turkey relations can
always calm and set sail again.
The Chinese Perception of Turkey and the
Turkish Perception of China
In the past ten years, with the continuous increase
of personnel exchanges between China and Turkey,
Turkey’s image in China has continuously improved,
and some Turkish keywords have become frequ-
ently mentioned in China as well. One is “hüzün”
(Pamuk, 2007). This word comes from Istanbul:
Memories and the City, the work of Orhan Pamuk,
winner of the Turkish Nobel Prize in Literature. As
a well-known writer, almost all Pamuk’s novels have
been translated into Chinese, and the Turkish image
constructed in his novels is well-known to Chine-
se readers. Of course, the current Turkish Republic
is not a gloomy existence, but very modern, bright,
and beautiful, in sharp contrast with the gloomy
existence of the late Ottoman Empire.
Evidently, the lack of political
mutual trust is still the crux of
developing Sino-Turkish relations.
However, thanks to the leadership
of the two heads of state, China-
Turkey relations can always calm
and set sail again.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
20
The second is “romance”. In the Chinese imagina-
tion, Turkey is a romantic place with excellent geog-
raphy and scenery. Just mentioning names, like the
Mediterranean Sea, the Aegean Sea, and the Bospho-
rus Strait, will arouse clear visions and longing in the
Chinese. That’s why the song “Take You to Romantic
Turkey” is so popular in China.
The third is “diversity”. Turkey is a country with
diverse cultures. The remains of many empires are
constantly being excavated in Turkey. Mosques, chur-
ches, synagogues, and more can be seen everywhere
in Istanbul. Besides, Turkish cuisine incorporates the
essence of diets from neighbouring countries and has
won the reputation of the world’s third-largest nation
of delicacies.
In addition to these positive impressions, the image
of Turkey in the minds of the Chinese people has also
been affected by the following historical events, which
have also deeply influenced the Turkish impression of
China. The first event is the Korean War. In China’s
historical narrative, the Korean War was for the real
founding of New China. In 1949, the People’s Repub-
lic of China had just been established, and the United
States isolated and blocked New China in all aspects.
Militarily, the US launched the Korean War, sent the
Seventh Fleet to invade the Taiwan Strait and interve-
ned in the Indochina War in Southeast Asia. Political-
ly, the United States asked the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and other countries not to recognize the
legitimacy of New China and manipulated the United
Nations to prevent New China from sending legal rep-
resentatives to replace seats illegally occupied by the
Kuomintang. Economically, blockades and embargo-
es were imposed on China and merchant ships of all
countries were prevented from entering New China’s
ports. To break the siege and blockade of Western
Meeting with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi within the framework of the 50th anniversary of our diplomatic
relations. (Xinhua/Mustafa Kaya, 2021)
21
Yang Chen - Xie Fang - The Mutual Construction of Image of China and Turkey: Perceptions, Problems, and Policy Proposals
countries headed by the United States, China sent a
“volunteer army” to participate in the Korean War.
At this time, the Turkish Democratic Party gover-
nment sent a “Turkish brigade” to join the “United
Nations Army” led by the United States. China and
Turkey became enemies at the time.
This incident also had a profound impact on Tur-
key’s understanding of modern China. Before the Ko-
rean War, Turks knew little and had no views about
China. In the Korean War, though, Turkey had war
correspondents for the first time. They went to the
Korean battlefield to report on the fighting between
China and Turkey at that time. Most reports on Chi-
na emphasized that China was a communist country
and that Turkey, as a member of the anti-communist
camp, must resolutely oppose “Red China”. However,
the difference in ideology alone cannot inflame the
emotions of the domestic people. Therefore, many re-
ports trace the contradictions and conflicts between
China and Turkey in history, arousing Turkish natio-
nal sentiment and deepening hostility towards China
(Ungor, 2006).
The second is the Varyag incident. The Varyag airc-
raft carrier is the predecessor of China’s first aircraft
carrier Liaoning. After the disintegration of the Soviet
Union, the Varyag aircraft carrier had not yet been
completed and could only be left idle in Ukraine. La-
ter, a Macau businessperson bought it in 1998, hoping
to transform it into a comprehensive maritime tou-
rism facility. However, in July 2000, when the Varyag
left the Black Sea port and headed for the Bosphorus
Strait, Turkey was pressured by a third country and
refused to let the Varyag fly due to it being oversized.
It was only allowed to be released on October 31st
2001 (Xian, 2011). More than one year’s non-release
and negotiations made the Chinese feel a great humi-
liation, especially alongside continuous pressure from
the West starting in the 1990s. Several years ago, when
Admiral Cem Gürdeniz, the naval colonel in charge of
this matter at the time, visited Shanghai, he explained
that the Varyag was not allowed to pass through the
strait for several reasons, including that the aircraft
carrier was too large to pass through the sea bridge
and that this created great risk for accidents. Howe-
ver, Chinese public opinion was not familiar with this
reasoning. Chinese people have always mentioned the
Varyag aircraft carrier stories as bitter memories that
continue to exert negative impressions of Turkey.
The third is the so-called “Xinjiang issue”. In fact,
it is known that some Western countries are the main
force providing shelter and assistance to the so-called
“East Turkistan” separatists, but when the Chinese pe-
ople mention this issue, they always think of Turkey.
In Turkey, Xinjiang is frequently referred to as “East
Turkestan” in the media and public opinion. Even
some politicians and political parties intensify this
problem to seek their own narrow political interests
(Rui & Lei, 2016). Furthermore, Western agitation
and propaganda greatly contribute to amplifying the-
se problems, which inhibits the steady development
of bilateral relations. From this point of view, if the
two populations can share similar perceptions on this
issue, the steady development of relations between the
two countries will acquire a more solid public founda-
tion (Ye, 2015).
In addition to the above incidents, the outbreak of
the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 brought new chal-
lenges and opportunities to China-Turkey relations.
Western agitation and propaganda
greatly contribute to amplifying
problems, which inhibits the
steady development of bilateral
relations. If the two populations
can share similar perceptions on
this issue, the steady development
of relations between the two
countries will acquire a more solid
public foundation.
22
B R I q • Cilt 2 Sayı 4 Sonbahar 2021
In the global fight against the pandemic, China has
paid a huge price and is willing to help and coopera-
te with all countries in need. For example, in Turkey,
President Erdogan personally took a vaccine made in
China, which greatly boosted Turkey’s image in the
minds of the Chinese (Wei, 2021). China has also co-
operated with Turkey to produce vaccines. However,
some Turkish scholars with Orientalist thinking argu-
ed that this is China’s “vaccine diplomacy” in adheren-
ce to Western hegemonic discourse instrumentalized
by politicians. Such a recurring cycle of events brings
severe challenges in promoting bilateral relations.
The Root Causes of Mutual
Misunderstanding between the Chinese
and Turkish People
China-Turkey relations suffer from persistent
misunderstandings between the people of China and
Turkey. This also applies to both countries’ scholars,
which inevitably affects the mutual construction
of positive images. If there is no public support
and mutual understanding, then the promotion of
bilateral relationships will face numerous obstacles.
One could enumerate the reasons behind such
misunderstandings as follows:
First, there is still a gap between China and
Turkey in their respective diplomatic priorities from
a political perspective. In China’s strategic thinking,
strategic partnership with Turkey is extremely
important because Turkey is both a NATO member
country and a dialogue partner of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. This makes Turkey
an important cooperative partner in Eurasia. In
addition, Turkey has become a rising regional power,
a land bridge connecting Europe and Asia, and an
indispensable part of China's implementation of the
“Belt and Road” initiative. For Turkey, developing
Traditional Chinese dragon dance is held in Istanbul in the Year of Chinese Culture. (China Daily, 2012)
23
Yang Chen - Xie Fang - The Mutual Construction of Image of China and Turkey: Perceptions, Problems, and Policy Proposals
relations with China is of great significance, mainly
for two reasons. Strategically, Turkey hopes to send
a message to traditional Western allies that China
is a strategic alternative. This can be seen from
the growing military relations between the two
countries, which is evident in Turkey’s application
to join the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Economically, Turkey believes that the Chinese
market has invaluable economic opportunities,
which is why it emphasizes its role as a bridge
between the East and the West, thereby reducing
its dependence on the Western economy (Chaziza,
2016). This shows that treating the West as a third
party has become an important factor in China-
Turkey relations. In addition, China and Turkey
suffer from inconsistencies in their understandings
of important global issues such as UN reform, the
Syrian crisis, the Arab Spring, and more.
Second, from a business perspective, Turkish
businesspeople attach great importance to China’s
market. Turkey hopes to cooperate with China
on railways, bridges, and hydropower projects,
but the growing trade deficit has become an
important concern for Turkey. China values its
economic exchanges with Turkey. For example,
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd set up a research
and development centre in Turkey. Huawei’s 5G
technology breakthrough relies greatly on Turkish
scientist Prof. Erdal Arikan’s scientific achievements.
Moreover, these products can directly enter the EU
market thanks to the customs union between Turkey
and Europe. This has laid favourable conditions for
China to expand investments in Turkey.
Over the 21st century, trade volume between
Turkey and China has gradually increased and
continues to do so. In 1990, it was US$283 million,
whereas in 2000 it rose to $1.441 billion. In 2012, it
was $24.128 billion and rose to $27.3 billion in 2015.
In 2020, it was estimated at $24.08 billion (Ministry
of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China,
2021). However, the real issue is that although
China is Turkey’s second-largest trading partner
in the world and the largest in Asia, the total trade
volume between the two countries has not yet made
a breakthrough since 2010, meaning there is still a
large gap in the mutually declared goal of US$50
billion.
Another problem is that Turkey does not hold
an advantage in Sino-Turkish trade exchanges.
The products exported to China are mainly raw
materials, and the imported products are mainly
machinery. How to reduce the trade deficit, upgrade
the exchange of products between the two countries,
and expand mutual investment between the two
countries are all issues that China and Turkey need
to address and resolve together.
Third, from an academic perspective, China and
Turkeyhaveheldthe“TurkishCulturalYearinChina”,
“Chinese Cultural Year in Turkey”, and “2018 Turkey
Tourism Year in China”. The exchanges between the
cultural and intellectual circles of the two countries
have begun to increase, and an increasing number
of scholars and students work and study in each
other’s respective countries. However, the overall
understanding between the two cannot satisfy the
needs of both sides. In Turkey, Sinology or Chinese
Studies has achieved remarkable results since its
establishment at Ankara University in 1935, but it
is currently facing difficulties such as insufficient
faculty, difficulties in recruiting students, and
inadequate social and government support (Saritas
& Yang, 2014). In China, although many universities
have established Turkish Studies Centres dedicated
to Turkey Studies, their supply of accurate and
In 1990, bilateral trade volume was
US$283 million, whereas in 2000
it rose to $1.441 billion. In 2012,
it was $24.128 billion and rose to
$27.3 billion in 2015. In 2020, it was
estimated at $24.08 billion.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
24
authentic knowledge is still inadequate. This is the
fundamental reason China and Turkey still lack a
correct understanding of each other and mostly rely
on third-party materials to realize this aim. This
situation urgently needs to be resolved.
Preliminary Measures to Reduce the
Misunderstanding of Each Other
Asmentionedabove,resolvingthemisunderstandings
between the people of China and Turkey requires
the participation of multiple actors and the joint
effort of politicians, businesses, scholars, journalists,
and the great masses. The most significant factor
is to strengthen the exchanges between the two
peoples, cultivate a group of experts and scholars
familiar with each other’s national conditions, and
quickly improve their correct understanding of each
other through the supply of more knowledge about
China and Turkey. This aim can be achieved by the
following:
First, promote the development of Turkey Studies
in China and China Studies in Turkey and increase
the supply of professional, unbiased, accurate
knowledge in each other’s countries. Although
Turkey Studies as a research area started relatively
late in China, it has achieved rapid development
in the past ten years. For example, in China,
several centres specializing in Turkey Studies have
been established across the country. An academic
journal named “Turkish Studies” was issued, the
Turkish Studies Consortium was established, and
the academic conference on Turkish Studies is held
multiple times each year. Of course, in general,
these works still fail to meet the needs of Chinese
academic circles and ordinary people. For example,
book publications on Mustafa Kemal Atatürk have
been abundant in Turkey and the rest of the world,
but there has not been a monograph published
in China, and there is still no Chinese version of
Ataturk’s Nutuk. Therefore, there is still a long way
to go for Chinese Turkey scholars.
Similarly, China Studies seems to face a similar
situation in Turkey. The number of scholars studying
contemporary China is still relatively limited,
meaning the supply of knowledge about China
is inadequate and cannot satisfy the needs of the
Turkish people. A significant development in this
area is the creation of a research centre called The
Istinye University Centre for Belt and Road Studies
(or Kuşak ve Yol Çalışmaları Uygulama ve Araştırma
Merkezi, KUYÇAM) in 2020. This is Turkey’s first
research centre that focuses on the “Belt and Road”,
emphasizing China Studies. The new era of China-
Turkey relations calls for the emergence of a new
generation of researchers.
Second, vigorously develop China-Turkey
tourism cooperation and increase direct exchanges
between ordinary people. Tourism brings economic
benefits, is a cultural industry, and represents the
most advantageous means for people to connect.
Turkey’s tourism industry is highly developed,
attracting 40 to 50 million tourists every year, but
the number of tourists from China only increased
from 100,000 to the current 500,000 before the
COVID-19 pandemic, thus only accounting for
a small percentage of total travellers to Turkey.
However, even this small number of tourists has
alreadyplayedaveryimportantroleinpromotingthe
romantic image of Turkey in China. The same is true
for China. Turkish students visiting China through
summer camps or other exchange programs also
help to challenge stereotypes. Tourism encourages a
more accurate and authentic lens for ordinary people
to view the other country, first-hand experience that
is often more effective than news, media, and art.
Third, actively establish joint research centres and
even joint universities to consolidate mutual trust
between the two countries through cooperation
in scientific research. Turkey already has similar
scientific research cooperation projects with many
other countries that have achieved concrete results.
In recent years, the number of Chinese students
25
Yang Chen - Xie Fang - The Mutual Construction of Image of China and Turkey: Perceptions, Problems, and Policy Proposals
studying in Turkey and the number of Turkish
students studying in China have increased, thus
showing great potential for the future. However, if
a joint research centre or a joint university can be
established, then higher-level scholars can go on
mutual visits and conduct dialogue, exchanges,
and share in fields of cutting-edge technology and
social sciences. Such exchanges are key to breaking
the dominant role that Western countries have in
producing knowledge, eradicating the research
paradigm of “Orientalism”, and working together to
realize the independent paths of the two countries.
Conclusion
In the past two hundred years, China-Turkey
relations have been built on “common destiny”
and “political equality”. A hundred years ago, the
Ottoman Empire was regarded as the “Sick Man of
Europe” while China was called the “Sick Man of East
Asia”. When the Republic of Turkey and the Republic
of China met again in 1925, both countries faced a
historicalturningpointintheirresistancetoWestern
imperialism, and national independence. Now,
in the 21st century, China’s “Chinese Dream” and
Turkey’s “Turkish Dream” are waiting to be realized.
Bilateral relations between China and Turkey have a
firm foundation for mutual sympathy, support, and
cooperation, but they must go further in developing
mutual understanding between ordinary people.
Through continuous contact, understanding, and
cognition, the two populations can understand each
other, eliminate past misunderstandings, and lay a
solid foundation for promoting bilateral relations
that are further rooted and reach even higher than
before.
Acknowledgements:
This article is supported by funding from the “Key
Project of Philosophy and Social Sciences of Mi-
nistry of Education of China” (17JZD036) and
“Post-funded Project of Chinese National Social
Science Foundation”.
References
Chaziza M. (2016). Sino-Turkish “Solid Strategic Part
nership”: China’s Dream or a Reality? China Report, 52
(4), 265-283.
Chen, Y. (2020). Developments in China-Turkey Relati
ons: A View from China. Critical Sociology, 46 (4-5),
777.
Colakoglu, S. (2014). Turkish Perceptions of China’s Rise.
USAK Report (39), 11-38.
Pamuk, O. (2007). Istanbul: Memories and the City
(Translated by He Peihua). Shanghai: Shanghai People’s
Publishing Press.
Rui, S. & Lei, Z. S. (2016). The Turkish Public’s Impression
of China. Weishi, (3), 87-89.
Saritas, E. & Chen, Y. (2014). A General Look Into Chi
nese Researches in Turkey as of Year 1935. West Asia
and Africa, (2), 149-157.
The Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of Chi
na (2021, March 3rd). Brief introduction of China-Tur
key economic and trade cooperation from Ja
nuary to December 2020. Retrieved from http://
www.mofcom.gov.cn/article/tongjiziliao/sjtj/yzzg
gb/202103/20210303042239.shtml
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China (2016, August 5th). Chinese Foreign Ministry
Spokesperson Hua Chunying’s Remarks on Vice Mi
nister Zhang Ming’s Visit to Turkey. Retrieved
from http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/wjdt_674879/fyr
bt_674889/t1387140.shtml
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China (2019, February 2nd). Chinese Foreign Mi
nistry Spokesperson Hua Chunying answered repor
ters’ questions on the situation and policies in Xinji
ang. Retrieved from https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/ce
tur/chn/xwdt/t1636990.htm
Ungor, C. (2006). Perceptions of China in the Turkish Ko
rean War Narratives. Turkish Studies, 7 (3), 405-420.
Wei, Y. (2021, January 15th). Turkish President Erdo
gan received China’s COVID-19 vaccine. Guanc
ha. Retrieved from https://www.guancha.cn/internati
on/2021_01_15_577969.shtml
Xian, X. (2011). China and Turkey: Forging a New Strate
gic Partnership. West Asia and Africa. (9), 24.
Yang, Q. Y. & Chun, L. (2017, April 19). Turkish Presi
dent Erdogan meets with Liu Yandong. Xinhua
net. Retrieved from http://www.xinhuanet.com/politi
cs/2017-04/19/c_1120835097.htm
Ye, T. Q. (2015). The Image Construction of Turkey in
Chinese Mainstream Newspapers and Discourse
Analysis on Reports about Turkey. West Asia and Af
rica, (5), 99-113.
Interactions Between Two Republics:
The Republic of Turkey and the
Republic of China (1923-1949)
Necati Demircan was born in 1992 in Sakarya. He graduated from Sakarya University, Department
of International Relations, in 2017. Between 2018-2021, he completed his master's degree in Internati-
onal Relations and Diplomacy at Shanghai University. Demircan is a PhD student in the Department
of Global Studies at Shanghai University.
Email: ndemircan11@shu.edu.cn
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5319-9629
Necatİ Demİrcan
PhD Student
Global Studies,
Shanghai University, China
Peer-Reviewed Article
How to cite: Demircan, N. (2021/2022). Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of
Turkey and the Republic of China. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 26-39.
27
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
ABSTRACT
The years between 1923 and 1949 are a lost period in terms of bilateral relations between Turkey and the
Republic of China (中华民国). Research conducted in this area is limited; studies examining Chinese
relations of the Atatürk period or general bilateral relations are limited, too. Friendly relations between
the two Republics, which had similar revolutions and reforms, were established in 1926, allowing them
to influence each other ideologically. Especially in China, many books, newspaper reviews, and articles
were published about Atatürk and the Turkish Revolution. Chinese delegations have made various visits
to Turkey to study the Turkish Revolution. Even though bilateral relations have been been occasionally
interrupted in periods as by the Second World War era, the general trend was toward continuity. This
study evaluates the relations between Turkey and the Republic of China by examining the Prime Ministry
archives, Presidency Archives, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Archives, and newspaper archives of the period
(Cumhuriyet, Ulus, Milliyet, and Akşam), and Chinese sources.
Keywords: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, Republic of China, Sun Yat-Sen, Three Principles of the People, Turkey
Introduction
TURKEY AND CHINA ARE TWO IMPORTANT
asian powers, each with a deep-rooted history and
civilization. The 1911 Chinese Revolution led by Sun
Yat-SenatoneendofAsiaandtheTurkishRevolution
led by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk at the other represent
an important awakening in Asia. The Republic of
China, founded in 1912, and the Republic of Turkey,
founded in 1923, were two young republics that
gained their independence by overthrowing the
monarchic regime and resisting imperialism. The
subsequent democratic revolutions carried out by
these two deep-rooted civilizations brought along a
mutual interaction. Sun Yat-Sen laid out a political
program based on the Three Principles of the People,
which included nationalism, democracy, and people’s
livelihood to fight against the feudalist autocracy.
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s Six Arrows program and
Sun Yat-Sen’s Three Principles of the People (三民主
義; Sān Mín Zhǔyì) were fundamentally in harmony
(Perinçek, 1999:23; Gürcan, 2010).
Lenin stated that the democratic revolution
wave that started with the 1905 Russian Revolution
continued in Asia by spreading to Turkey, Iran, and
China. Moreover, he explained how Sun Yat-Sen’s
populist principles were a Narodniks movement
based on the people’s desire for full democracy
and republic and that the movement would create
a radical wave of new ideas. He emphasized that
this program was a revolutionary movement that
mobilized the working masses in China and allowed
the Chinese people to escape centuries of captivity
(Lenin, 1973: 163-169). Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was
pursuing a populist, secular, revolutionary program
for a democratic revolution that resisted imperialism
and tried to build national economy against its
capitulations. Despite their geographical distance,
the similarities between the two republics brought
them closer and were instrumental in establishing
friendly relations.Before they established a
diplomatic relationship,
China was interested in Turkey. At the heart of this
interest was the resistance of both countries against
imperialism. Cai Hesen (蔡和森)1, a member of the
Communist Party of China (CCP), enthusiastically
hailed Turkey’s victory over the imperialists in his
article written in 1922. He stated that Turkey and
1 Cai Hesen: Member of the CCP and a close friend of Mao Zedong.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
28
China were exposed to the pressures of imperialism
and that the Anatolian victory of the Turks was a
development that would encourage all oppressed
nations, especially China (Fidan, 2019: 5-10).
Another CCP member, Gao Junyu (高君宇), also
hailed Turkey’s victory over imperialism (Junyu,
2019: 97-102).
Turkey’s success against imperialism has
had a significant impact on China’s progressive
intellectuals. This situation encouraged the
strengthening of China’s relations with Turkey. The
fact that the revolutions of 1911 in China and 1923
in Turkey were similar in character further aligned
the two countries. The frequent visits of Chinese
delegations to understand the success of the Turkish
Revolution and the reports they gave about Turkey
highlight this situation. Turkey similarly followed
developments in China and Far Asia. Especially
during the Sino-Japanese War, reports from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Tokyo Embassy
were published on events in the region and China’s
economic developments (BCA, 1940).
Although many interactions between the
two countries exemplify close friendship and
understanding, a study containing sufficient
information about the relations between Turkey
and the Republic of China in the period was not
found in the literature review. It has been observed
that the studies conducted in general are studies
involving a narrow-ranging period and with
limited resources. For this reason, there is an
important need to clarify the relations between
Turkey and China between 1923 and 1949. This is
a study to address the lack of a descriptive study on
the relations between Turkey and the Republic of
China for 1923 to 1949.
Diplomatic Relations Between Turkey and the
Republic of China (1923-1949)
After establishing the Republic of Turkey, a great effort
was made to solidify a peaceful diplomatic network
with other countries through foreign policy. The
first diplomatic contact with the Republic of China
was made on 17 October 1925 by an initiative of the
Belgian Embassy of Turkey to establish diplomatic
relations (DBA, 1925; 1925a; 1925b). Turkey contacted
China’s Ambassador to Belgium, Wang Jingqi, to
show its intention to develop friendly relations with
China and to sign a trade agreement. Having received
information that the Turkish Government wanted to
establish diplomatic relations with China, the Beiyang
Government2 ordered the Chinese ambassador in
Belgium to immediately contact the Turkish chargé
d’affaires to negotiate and sign a trade agreement.
However, when the Turkish chargé d’affaires stated
that the most favored nation registration clause
Employees of China’s First Embassy in Turkey.
(Cumhuriyet Newspaper, 11 June 1935)
2 (Chinese: 北洋政府; pinyin: Běiyáng Zhèngfǔ) The government of the Republic of China, whose capital was Beijing, between 1912 and 1928. It was named
after the Beiyang Army, which had dominated its politics with the rise of the general of the Qing Dynasty, Yuan Shikai. Sun Yat-sen's Guangzhou-based
Kuomintang government movement seriously challenged the legitimacy of the Beiyang government in 1917. Chiang Kai-shek defeated the Beiyang warlords
during the Northern Campaign of 1926-1928. In 1928, he overthrew factions and the government, effectively uniting the country. The Kuomintang established
its nationalist government in Nanjing, transforming the political order into a one-party state.
29
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
should be used in the trade agreement to be
signed, the negotiations on the trade agreement
were firmly opposed by the Chinese Government.
However, China recognized Turkey as a large Asian
state and understood that a trade agreement should
be signed as soon as possible to establish friendly
relations (Huang, 2003).
On 4 March 1926, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Beiyang Government called the
diplomat Zheng Yanxi in Russia and asked him to
contact Zekai Apaydın, Turkey’s Ambassador to
Russia. While the consultations and negotiations
between Zheng Yanxi and Zekai Apaydın were
continuing, 165 Chinese led by Wang Zengshan
and Ma Hongdao, who lived in Turkey for many
years, submitted a joint petition to the Beiyang
government to accelerate the friendship and
signing of the trade agreement with Turkey. The
Beiyang government prepared a draft of an 8-point
China-Turkish friendship treaty. However, China’s
Xinjiang Province Governor, Yang Zengxin (杨增
新), opposed signing any agreement with Turkey,
fearing that Turkey could influence Xinjiang
Muslims to create a power element in the region
(Huang, 2003: 54). The establishment of the
national government in Nanjing interrupted
negotiations between Turkey and China.
In 1929, while negotiations on the friendship
treaty between the two countries were continuing,
Turkey attempted to have the Japanese ambassador
Hulusi Fuad Tugay recognized as the Chinese
Chargé d’Affaires. China accepted this request
(BCA, 1929). Thus, Hulusi Fuad Tugay became
Turkey’s first Chinese diplomat. Hulusi Fuad Tugay
arrived in Shanghai on 1 April 1929 and went to
Nanjing on 9 April to be accepted by the Minister
of Foreign Affairs. During the meeting, the Chinese
Foreign Minister conveyed his satisfaction with
establishing bilateral relations and stated that China
is going through the revolutions Turkey had gone
through, therefore expressing how the Chinese
government and the Chinese nation had sympathy
towards Turkey (BCA, 1929a). Turkey’s chargé
d’affaires experienced various accommodation and
economic problems between 1929 and 1931 and
consequently had to leave China in 1931.
Mutual negotiations and correspondence were
madebetweenTurkeyandChinatosignafriendship
agreement from 1925 to 1934, but, due to various
reasons, an agreement could not be reached. At
the end of nine years of mutual negotiations, on
4 April 1934, a four-point friendship agreement
was signed in Ankara between Tevfik Rüştü Bey,
Deputy Foreign Minister on behalf of Turkey, and
M. V Hoo Chi Tsai (胡世泽hushize), the Bern
Ambassador on behalf of the Republic of China
(Official Gazette of the Republic of Turkey, 1934).
After China and Turkey signed a friendship and
trade agreement, diplomatic representations were
established between the two countries, and political
and economic relations were strengthened. For
example, in the same year, China’s exports to Turkey
exceeded 100,000 silver dollars. This amount
constituted 2.5% of China’s exports at that time.
Thus, trade between Turkey and China doubled.
In particular, Chinese citizens came to Turkey to
work and do business, which greatly encouraged
Turkey attempted to have the
Japanese ambassador Hulusi
Fuad Tugay recognized as the
Chinese Chargé d’Affaires. China
accepted this request. Thus, Hulusi
Fuad Tugay became Turkey’s first
Chinese diplomat.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
30
social interactions between the two countries
(Huang, 2003:55). At the same time, after signing
the Turkish-Chinese friendship treaty, the number
of Chinese delegations to Turkey increased. In
this case, the curiosity of the Chinese about the
Turkish Revolution and the rapid development of
Turkey was effective.
It is possible to understand China’s interest
in the Turkish Revolution from the interview
of Turkey’s first Chinese ambassador. After
establishing bilateral relations, China’s first envoy,
He Yao Zu (贺耀祖), expressed his intent in the
Cumhuriyet newspaper in Nanjing to try and
apply the Turkish Revolution to his country by
studying it. China’s first Turkish diplomats had
a very high interest in the Turkish Revolution.
The First Chinese Ambassador He Yao Zu was in Çankaya to present his letter of trust. (Ulus Newspaper, 17 May 1935)
31
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
Nimetullah, the second clerk of the Chinese
Embassy in Ankara, completed his secondary
and high school education in Turkey and even
graduated from the Faculty of Letters of Istanbul
University.
Nimetullah frequently mentioned the
Turkish Revolution in the conferences he gave
in China (Cumhuriyet, 1935:1-2). In addition,
Wang Pengsheng (王芃生), undersecretary of
the Chinese Embassy in Ankara, believed that
Turkey’s success offered an important lesson for
China. He stated that Japan and Turkey brought
about successful national revolutions in Asia,
but the difference was that while Japan had
imperialist ambitions, Turkey adopted a peaceful
policy. According to Pengsheng, the modern and
humanitarian policy drawn by Atatürk was an
example for all nations of the world. He said that
the Chinese nation should strive to walk the path
drawn by Atatürk (Cumhuriyet, 1935b: 1-4).
On 7 May 1935, China’s first Ambassador
to Turkey, He Yao Zu, arrived in Istanbul. The
Ambassador said on the first day, “I bring the
Chinese nation’s respectful greetings to your
Great Chief and his precious friends who
saved Turkey. We hope that by establishing an
embassy in Turkey, we will help strengthen the
relationship between the two friendly nations.
Since I did not give the letter of confidence to
your President, I say these words not as an envoy,
but as a true Turkish friend” (Cumhuriyet, 1935c:
2). On 16 May 1935, He Yao Zu, the first Chinese
Ambassador to Turkey, began his mission by
presenting a letter of confidence to President
Atatürk, stating how “It is an unprecedented
opportunity for us to learn important lessons
from Atatürk”, the Chinese envoy told Anadolu
newspaper.
Giving an example from a Chinese poem, he
stated that “The greatest pleasure is to have a new
friend, and after a long separation, an old friend
can come to a new friend. It is impossible not to
say that we have become new friends after our
historical relations of 3000 years have become
old acquaintances. By a beautiful coincidence, it
rained with thunder before I delivered the letter
of confidence. In our old books, thunder brings
movement. It is a good omen that will strengthen
our relations from today on. And rain means
friendship. Our ancestors called their old friends
the old rains. We are very pleased that this symbol
has come to our official relations with our former
relations” (Ulus, 1935:3; 1935a: 1-3; Anadolu,
1935: 1-4; Yeni Asır, 1935: 3).
These words from the Chinese Ambassador
reveal a deep awareness of the historical past
between the Turks and the Chinese, and his belief
in the Turkish Revolution’s application to China
was very strong. It is further possible to see this
belief of the ambassador in the statements he
gave to Turkish and Chinese newspapers and in
the reports he wrote to the Chinese government
about Turkey.
The interest and relevance of Chinese diplomats in
Turkey to Turkish development and modernization
are great, for they enabled the revolutionary and
progressive personality of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk to
play an influential role. In 1938, the newly appointed
Chinese Chargé d’Affaires M.D. Toung stated in an
interview with the Cumhuriyet newspaper that he
Wang Pengsheng believed
that Turkey’s success offered an
important lesson for China, and the
modern and humanitarian policy
drawn by Atatürk was an example
for all nations of the world.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
32
was very pleased to be in Ankara, which combined
the charms of the east and the west. He stated that
the Turks took civilization from the east to the
west, and now they took the new and modern
civilization from the west to the east. He stated
that the Chinese President, Chiang Kai-shek (蒋介
石), always commemorates Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
and his revolutions with admiration and how “The
Chinese nation is fighting against the Japanese for its
glorious future with the methods of Kemal Atatürk
in the national struggle. We are defending national
dignity, honor, and peace. China has never fought. Its
history and philosophy prove this. It is a Chinese love
of peace” (Cumhuriyet, 1938: 5). Turkey’s struggle
for national independence against imperialism was
an important symbol of Chinese resistance against
Japanese imperialism. The common attitude between
Turkey and China against imperialism is evident in
this interview.
TurkeyalsostrivedtoestablishanembassyinChina
after an 8-year hiatus. Emin Ali Sipahi (Ministerial)
arrived in Chongqing on the morning of 21 December
1939. The Chinese warmly welcomed the first Turkish
ambassador assigned to their country. Diplomat
Mao-Lan-Tuan, Chinese foreign press members and
the Turks living in China welcomed the ambassador.
Emin Ali Sipahi was received by Chiang Kai-Shek on
27 December and began his duties as the first Turkish
Ambassador to China (BCA, 1940). However, due
to the continuation of the Sino-Japanese War during
this period, the Turkish ambassador had to continue
his duty from Shanghai between 1940 and 1941.
Due to the Second World War, relations were
not interrupted, but there were occasional gaps
in the appointment of ambassadors. The Chinese
Ambassador, Feng Chun Chang, who was appointed
to Ankara on 2 June 1942, was received by President
İsmet İnönü (Cumhuriyet, 1942: 1). The Chinese
Ambassador, Chang, left Turkey for another
mission and the Vatan newspaper, believing that
the ambassador had been appointed to a different
location, wrote that he was an exceptional person,
that he had established many friendships in Ankara
in a short time. He made a news report that the
departure of the Chinese envoy from Turkey would
cause serious hesitation and leave a gap (Vatan, 1942:
1). In 1943, bilateral relations were upgraded to the
ambassadorial level, and Hulusi Fuat Tugay was
appointed to Chongqing as the first Ambassador and
submitted a letter of confidence on 13 June 1944.
In 1944, a delegation consisting of three people,
Wan Yun Woo, Wen Yuan Ning, and Han Li Woo,
came to Turkey to develop the Turkish-Chinese
friendship (BCA, 1944). After the Second World War,
the Turkish embassy continued to work in Nanjing
and Shanghai. Despite the civil war in China, efforts to
improve bilateral relations continued. In a note from
the Chinese embassy in 1945, they stated that they
He Yao Zu, First Chinese Ambassador.
(Ulus Newspaper, 17 May 1935)
33
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
wanted to open a consulate in Istanbul (BCA, 1945).
Remarkably, there was no correspondence between
the Presidents until this period. After the Second
World War ended, on 15 August 1945, President
İsmet İnönü sent a congratulatory message to the
President of China, Chiang Kai-Shek, celebrating his
victory over Japan (BCA, 1945a). This represents the
first correspondence between the Presidents. In 1947,
Li Ti Tsu was appointed as the Chinese Ambassador
to Ankara. After the intensification of the civil war
in China and the realization that Nanjing would be
placed under communist rule, the Turkish Foreign
Ministry ordered the Ambassador to withdraw to
Hong Kong. Thus, after the disappearance of the
Republic of China, the Turkish government could
not determine what attitude to take, resulting in
diplomatic relations being cut off.
China’s Interest in the Turkish Revolution
Before diplomatic relations between Turkey and the
Republic of China were established, interest in the
Turkish Revolution in China was high. Between 1920
and 1930, a total of 46 political comments and reports
was written in newspapers and magazines about the
Kemalist Revolution and reforms, the 1908 Revoluti-
on, and the War of Independence (Ye, 2021: 72-77). It
is enough to look at the abundance of reports in the
Chinese press to understand China’s intense interest
in Atatürk and the Kemalist Revolution. From 1919
to 1949, 745 articles were written about Atatürk’s life
and struggle in the Chinese press (Alan, 2020: 21-26).
Before establishing diplomatic relations between
the two countries, Shi Zaoji the Chinese Ambassador
to the United States, visited Turkey in 1925. In his ob-
servations, the Ambassador stated that Turkey was in
a much worse situation than China at the end of the
World War I, but in 3 years, China dumped its enemy
into the sea, signed the Lausanne Peace Treaty, abo-
lished its capitulations, established a new regime, and
rapidly developed and built a new capital.
In particular, the Chinese diplomat was attracted
by Turkey’s careful decision not to borrow foreign
currency and its resolute stance on abolishing capi-
tulations. The ambassador believed that there were
many important points that China could learn from
in this determined attitude of Turkey towards foreign
powers. In his writings, he asserted that Turkey’s suc-
cessful experiences are a reference for China, though
he acknowledged that the Turkish example could not
be applied exactly (Fidan, 2019: 53-60). Here, con-
sidering the social differences between China and
Turkey, the ambassador thought it was right to take
Turkey as an example with a specialized perspective
on China.
The visit of Hu Hanmin (胡汉民) and Finance
Minister Sun Ke (孙科)3 to Turkey in 1928 was im-
portant to bilateral relations between Turkey and Chi-
na. Although bilateral relations had not been officially
established yet, this was the highest-level visit of China
to Turkey. Hu Hanmin and Sun Ke were individuals
who held significant political weight in the Kuoming-
tang. The delegation observed social change, educatio-
nal mobilization, fiscal reforms, the CHP (Republican
People’s Party), and Turkish nationalism in Turkey.
In addition, Hu Hanmin and Sun Ke held a meeting
with İsmet İnönü, the Prime Minister of Turkey. Hu
Hanmin was impressed by Turkey’s successful reforms
and sincerely stated that Turkey should be taken as an
example (Fidan, 2019: 62- 73). After this visit, relations
between the two countries developed rapidly and dele-
Hu Hanmin and Sun Ke held a
meeting with İsmet İnönü, the
Prime Minister of Turkey. Hu
Hanmin was impressed by Turkey’s
successful reforms and sincerely
stated that Turkey should be
taken as an example.
3 Sun Ke: 1911 He is the eldest son of Sun Yat Sen, the leader of the Chinese Revolution. Hu Hanmin was one of the most prominent leaders of the
Kuomintang who served Minister of Foreign Affairs, and President of the Legislative Council.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
34
gation visits to observe Turkey increased.
In the 1930s, China’s interest in the Turkish Revo-
lution gradually increased. It is possible to understand
this from the increase in the visits of the Chinese de-
legations to examine the Turkish Revolution closely.
The first official visit was in 1930 by a Chinese military
delegation of three, consisting of General Vonk Moo
Song, Colonel Cenk Kay, and Pilot M. V. Chio. The de-
legation stated that “All of China follows the Turkish
youth and revolutions with great relevance and appre-
ciation”. It also stressed that “the Chinese intelligentsia
recognized and loved Mustafa Kemal as the greatest
saint”. The delegation was interested in revolutions,
especially the revolution of the Turkish alphabet and
found observation very fruitful. It expressed “How
China considered adopting Latin letters after Turkey
as the guide to the civilization of the East. However,
in their review, they stated that it was not realistical-
ly possible, so they worked to make reading the old
letters easier by correcting and standardizing them”
(Cumhuriyet, 1930: 2; 1930a: 2).
The second official visit was the visit of the Chinese
military delegation to Istanbul and Ankara on 17 Feb-
ruary 1934 to observe the Turkish army. The delegati-
on consisted of Nanjing Military Academy comman-
der General Yang Shiyesin (Chih-Zhang Zhizhong
張治中), Colonel Huvang, Lieutenant Colonel Voo,
Captain Chen Soai Shiyeh, Lieutenant Tishan Loo,
and Clerk Tong. After conducting military studies
in America and Europe, the delegation visited the
military barracks in Turkey (Cumhuriyet, 1934: 1-4;
1934a). The head of the delegation stated that they
were very pleased to have the opportunity to get to
know the young Republic better. He stated that his
views on the Turkish army were very important for
China. In addition, the delegation was also accepted
by Atatürk. The head of the delegation stated how
Welcoming Chinese Ambassador He Yao Zu in Istanbul. (Cumhuriyet Newspaper, 8 May 1935)
35
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
Turkey had made important revolutions in a short
time and rose rapidly due to its valuable leader. He
underlined his admiration for Atatürk in the develop-
ment of Turkey and emphasized the lack of such a le-
ader in the Chinese Revolution (Cumhuriyet, 1934b:
1-4; 1934e: 2).
China has given special attention to the study of the
Turkish Revolution to sustain its economic, military,
and political development. On 14 June 1934, a dele-
gation of 4 people consisting of M. Chang, M. Farrai
Chang, M. Z. D. Shu, and M. Shelley Love arrived. The
delegation examined the Republican regime, its bene-
fits, working style, and system in Ankara to organize a
program that would strengthen China financially and
morally. The head of the delegation stated that they vi-
sited the committee working in the Foreign Ministry
in Nanjing to convey their examinations. The delegati-
on leader stressed how Turkey was the most remarkab-
le country to undergo major revolutions and develop-
ment during its examinations. He stated that Turkey
is the country that they pay the most attention to. The
chairman of the delegation emphasized that it is an im-
portant necessity to observe Turkey closely, which is
embodied by a genius leader and valuable staff around
him. (Cumhuriyet, 1934c: 1-4; 1934d: 5).
In October 1934, a military delegation consisting of
1 General (Sin Ju Tu), 2 Colonels, 2 Lieutenant Colo-
nel, and 1 Professor (Wu-Tang) came to examine the
military developments in Turkey and Europe. The de-
legation visited Istanbul Police School, Harbiye High
School, War Academy, and Galatasaray High School
and took a close interest in the Scouting organization.
Wu-Tang wrote a note in the school’s visiting book
about how they found the scout organization and es-
pecially its equipment to be excellent. The delegation
then continued its trips in Ankara (Akşam, 1934a: 7;
1934b: 4; Cumhuriyet, 1934f: 2). Their telegram when
the Chinese military delegation left Turkey stated that
“appreciated the great achievements of the CHP, recal-
ling the critical condition China had before the War of
Independence, which is similar to the current situation
in China” (BCA, 1934).
In 1937, at the request of the League of Nations and
the Chinese government, Professor Pen came to obser-
ve Turkey’s health and social organization. In his ob-
servations, Pen stated that it was essential for China to
imitate Turkey, which showed significant development
in its health and society. He stated the importance of
Turkey having Atatürk as a leader, who directed the
civil and social revolutions after the liberation stru-
ggle. According to Pen, Turkey was the only example
for China (Cumhuriyet, 1937: 3).
Wang Pengsheng (王芃生), the undersecretary
of the Chinese Embassy in Ankara, thought that the
relations between the two states had a long history and
that both states had gone through similar difficulties.
He believed imperialist states wanted to suppress the
two nations, aligning their destiny. He noted that the
liberation and development of the Turkish nation un-
der the leadership of Atatürk caused indescribable joy
in the whole of China and that Turkey’s development
success in ten years was an important lesson in Chi-
na as in other countries. For this reason, he suggested
that the Chinese press should discuss Turkish success
frequently:
“This success is the source of the great feeling of
friendship held by the Chinese state towards the Tur-
kish nation. For China, Turkey’s development was a
Wang Pengsheng thought that the
relations between the two states
had a long history and that both
states had gone through similar
difficulties.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
36
great lesson to be benefited from. Therefore, it was de-
cided that China should establish an embassy in Anka-
ra that was given more importance than the embassies
in other countries.”
Pengsheng thought it would be a pleasure for the
Turks to see the salvation of the Chinese by taking les-
sons from the Turks. Madam Wang, the wife of the
undersecretary, stated in her declaration that she was
very glad that the Turkish woman had won the right to
be elected, stating that she had been satisfied that this
right had been in China since 1911. Embassy emplo-
yee Nimetullah Ma (Beijing Muslim clerk) translated
Atatürk’s Speech, Ziya Gökalp’s principles of Turkism,
and Ömer Seyfettin’s stories into Chinese (Cumhuri-
yet, 1935a: 1-9).
Before He Yao Zu, China’s first Ambassador to
Turkey, came to Turkey, his leading questions were
as follows: “how Turkey developed a unique political
path between communism and fascism”, “how Tur-
key’s parliament was able to continue its work without
turning into an autocracy despite being a single party”,
and “how Turkey developed economically in a short
time”.
Firstly, He Yao Zu stated that the cultural and his-
torical depth of the Turks was effective in creating a
unique political path, even if other ideologies influ-
enced it. However, this influence was tempered by a
deep-rooted historical heritage that created a strong
nationalism that played an important role in finding
its own way despite the ideologies of fascism and com-
munism. He outlined how success in Turkey was due
to the successful execution of the constitution and the
separation of powers. He also noted that the stability
in Turkey’s rapid economic development was achieved
by reducing imports and through government incen-
tives for local production in industry and agriculture:
“This model of Turkey corresponds to the Three
Principles of the People. This proves how far-sighted
Sun Yat-Sen was. The Turkish model succeeded in
practice, and if this model was applied to China, the-
re would be prosperity in a short time” (Fidan, 2019:
88-99).
At the same time, the election of China’s first
ambassador to Turkey was carefully considered. He
Yao Zu was the most suitable candidate to take on
this important task at that time. He prepared a re-
port on “Turkey’s Revival History and Our Efforts
in the Country’s Difficult Times”. In this report, he
presented an analysis of China and Turkey’s history
and current situation, stressing the importance of
Turkey as a model for China. It showed that He Yao
Zu and the embassy employees who went to Turkey
fulfilled their duties and played an important role in
strengthening the communication between China
and Turkey. He Yao Zu and others had a deep un-
derstanding of the Turkish Revolution and believed
that China should learn from the experiences of the
Turkish Revolution. Wang Pengsheng, the first sec-
retary of the Chinese Ambassador to Turkey, was a
well-known historian. He outlined China and Tur-
key’s long and close friendly relationship since the
11th century BC to explain that Sino-Turkish rela-
tions have not been interrupted since ancient times.
He brought many ancient Chinese books with him,
proving that the friendship between the two count-
ries has a long history. Consequently, the ancient
Chinese books taken by the Turkish ambassador of
China satisfied the desire of the stabilized Turkey to
discover the origin of the nation (Geng, 2013).
He Yao Zu and the embassy
employees who went to Turkey
had a deep understanding of the
Turkish Revolution and believed
that China should learn from
the experiences of the Turkish
Revolution. of the Turkish nation
under the leadership of Atatürk
37
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
Turkey’s Interest in China
Turkey also conducted political and academic studies
aimed at recognizing China. As relations improved
between the two countries, the Faculty of Language
and Geography of Ankara University was established
(1935), and Sinology and Turkology studies were
started. After the arrival of Wolfram Eberhard in
Turkey in 1937, sinology studies in Turkey greatly
expanded. Eberhard taught Sinology and history at the
Faculty of Language Geography of Ankara University
between 1937 and 1948. In 1947, Eberhard’s book ’A
History of China’ was published. However, due to
the cessation of bilateral relations after establishing
the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the study of
Sinology in Turkey was disrupted.
The Turkish embassy conducted several studies
aimed at recognizing China and the Kuomintang. Two
of Eberhard’s books about Atatürk and the Turkish
revolution published in China (The New Turkey-Song
Su Shen and Kemal-Xing Moqing) were translated
into English and sent to the Atatürk corner in Izmir.
In addition, the Turkish embassy translated the
Chinese Kuomintang party charter and the Chinese
Constitution and sent it to the CHP (Republican
People’s Party) (BCA, 1942; 1948). At the same time,
the Chinese embassy also did similar work for the
Kuomintang on understanding the CHP.
After the Sino-Japanese conflict in Manchuria, the
Turkish government prepared a 23-page report on the
subject. This report stated that China was the target
of the Japanese imperialists and that the capitulations
offered by Japan to the Chinese government were the
most terrible example of Japanese imperialism. The
Turkish example was frequently cited regarding the
abolition of the capitulations in Manchuria, where
the nationalist movements in China increased daily.
Furthermore, during the protests in which Japanese
The visit of the Chinese Military Delegation to the Istanbul Police School. (Cumhuriyet Newspaper, 3 October 1934)
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
38
goods were boycotted and the Japanese consulate was
set in stone, university students held demonstrations
with the banner “Do not forget about the example of
Turkey”. The goal of the Japanese imperialists was to
seize China to dominate Central Asia (BCA, 1931).
In fact, a correspondence sent from the Turkish
Embassy in Warsaw stated that the Japanese were
planning to use the Turkish and Muslim communities
in Asia against the Chinese and Soviets. In addition,
a Japanese map showing the Turkic communities in
Asia was also added to the correspondence (BCA,
1933).
Japan’s imperialist goals were instrumental in
encouraging the Turkish government to take a pro-
Chinese stance. The Turkish government wanted
the issue to be resolved peacefully and expressed its
discomfort that Japan pursued an imperialist policy.
Turkey’s Bern Ambassadors Cemal Hüsnü Bey
and Sivas Deputy Necmettin Sadık took part in the
commission formed by the League of Nations on the
Sino-Japanese conflict (BCA, 1932).
In addition, the Turkish press paid attention to
China’s struggle for independence against Japanese
imperialism. An article called “The Chinese Future of
Chiang Kai-Shek” was published. Moreover, articles
on Chinese modernization and life between Turkey
and China (Nadi, 1943: 1-4; Chiang, 1945:2) also
reflected this support (Cumhuriyet, 1935d: 7). The
fact that Turkey recognized the imperialist threat in
China and openly expressed its support for resisting
it demonstrates the importance of uniting against
imperialism in bilateral relations.
Conclusion
The most influential factor in the development of dip-
lomatic relations between Turkey and China was the
issue of how the Turkish Revolution and the Chine-
se Revolution had a similar character. Sun Yat-Sen’s
Three Principles of the People and Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk’s Six Arrow program pioneered democratic
revolutions in Asia. Particularly, Chinese intellectu-
als’ interest in the rapid development and reforms of
the Turkish Revolution helped to effectively establish
diplomatic relations with Turkey. The visits of Chine-
se military and diplomatic delegations to Turkey were
the clearest indication of this situation. China saw
Turkey as a role model country in development and
reforms. In addition, Turkey also considered China to
be a peaceful country in the east and actively tried to
get to know China to strengthen relations.
Furthermore, employees of the Chinese embassy
in Ankara comprehended the historical depth of the
relations between Turkey and China and the Turkish
Revolution. In Turkey, it seems that when bilateral re-
lations were strengthened, studies were carried out to
understand historical China by giving special atten-
tion to Sinology and Turcology studies. At the same
time, given that China was the target of Japanese im-
perialism and Turkey was fighting a war of indepen-
dence against imperialism made it easier for the two
countries to align. Turkey had a policy that supported
China against imperialism in embassy reports and the
Turkish press. Despite the chaos of the Second World
War and the civil war in China, the relations between
the two countries have since developed steadily.
Turkish-Chinese relations between 1923 and 1949
were a period of friendship in which they strived to
improve their knowledge of each other. The relations-
hip between the two countries focused on solidarity
against imperialism and mutually learning.
Turkish-Chinese relations between
1923 and 1949 were a period of
friendship in which they strived to
improve their knowledge of each
other.
39
Necati Demircan -Interactions Between Two Republics: The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of China (1923-1949)
References
Alan, E. (2020). 1919-1949 yılları arasında Çin gazetele
rinde çıkan Mustafa Kemal haberleri ve Çin’e etkisi,
Teori Dergisi, Kasım, 21-26.
Chiang, K. (1945, 12 Aralık). Çin’in İstikbali,
Cumhuriyet, 2.
Fidan, G. (2019). Cumhuriyet’in Çinli Misafirleri,
İstanbul: Türkiye İş Bankası Yayınları.
Geng, P. (耿萍萍), (2013). 以《申报》为视角
探究1935－1936 年的中土关系Yǐ “shēnbào” wèi
shìjiǎo tànjiù 1935-1936 nián de zhōng tǔ
guānxì), Forward Position, No.14, No.340.
Gürcan, E. C. (2010). The Evolution of Turkish
Nationalism: An Unconventional Approach Based on
a Comparative and International Perspective. In W.
Glass (Ed.), Beyond Imagined Uniqueness:
Nationalisms in Contemporary Perspectives (pp. 141-
168). New Castle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Huang, W. (黄维民), (2003). 中土关系的历史考察
及评析(Zhōng tǔ guānxì de lìshǐ kǎochá jí píngxī).
西亚非洲(Xīyǎ fēizhōu). 5 期.
Junyu, G. (2020). Türk Milli Ordusunun Zaferinin
Uluslararası Kıymeti, Kuşak ve Yol Girişimi Dergisi,
1(3), 97-102.
Lenin, V. I. (1973). Collected Works Vol.18, April
1912-March1913, Moscow: Progress Publisher.
Nadi, N. (1943, 12 Birinci Teşrin). Çin istiklali ve Mareşal
Çan Kayşek, Cumhuriyet, 1-4.
Perinçek, D. (1999). Kemalist Devrim-3 Altı Ok.
İstanbul: Kaynak Yayınları.
T.C Resmi Gazete. (1934). Sayı: 2722, 9 Haziran, 3956.
Ye, Z. (2021). Turkey as a role model in Chinese
newspapers of 1920-1930s. [Review of the
book The road of Turkey: Research and review of
Chinese scholars by Wang, S.] Belt & Road
Initiative Quarterly, 2(3), 73-77.
Archive Documents
BCA. (1929, Nisan 29). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 129-926-7.
BCA. (1929a, Haziran 17). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 257-728-2.
BCA. (1931, Aralık 30). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no:257-728-7.
BCA. (1932, Aralık 13). Fon: 30-18-1-2 Yer: 32-74-14.
BCA. (1933, Haziran 26). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no 257-729-26.
BCA. (1934, Şubat 28). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 257-728-11.
BCA. (1936, Ocak 9). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no:257-727-15.
BCA. (1940, Şubat 20). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 257-728-15.
BCA. (1942, Kasım 26). Fon 490-1-0-0, Yer no: 206-818-1.
BCA. (1944, Ocak 24). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 257-728–20.
BCA. (1945, Temmuz 30). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 257-728-21.
BCA. (1945a, Ağustos 15). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 235-590-21.
BCA. (1947, Şubat 25). Fon 30-10-0-0, Yer no: 131-940-37.
BCA. (1948). Fon 490-1-0-0, Yer no: 605-94-2.
DBA. (1925, Ağustos 2). Fon: 515, Yer no: 7414-38427-5.
DBA. (1925a, Kasım 24). Fon: 515, Yer no: 7414-38427-4.
DBA. (1925b, Kasım 26). Fon: 515, Yer no: 7414-38427-3.
Newspapers
Akşam. (1934, 5 Nisan) Türkiye-Çin Dostluk Muahedesi, 2.
Akşam. (1934a, 3 Ekim) Çin Askeri heyetinin Ziyaretleri, 7.
Akşam. (1934b, 9 Ekim) Çin Askeri Heyetinin Tetkikleri, 4.
Anadolu. (1935, 19 Mayıs). Çin Elçisinin Söylevi, 1-4.
Cumhuriyet. (1930, 27 Eylül) Bir Çin Heyeti, 2.
Cumhuriyet. (1930a, 28 Eylül). Çin Heyeti, 2.
Cumhuriyet. (1934, 17 Şubat). Bir Çin askeri heyeti şehrimize geldi, 1-4,
Cumhuriyet. (1934a, 23 Şubat).
Cumhuriyet. (1934b, 24 Şubat) Çin heyeti reisinin İntibaları, 1-4.
Cumhuriyet. (1934c, 14 Haziran) Bir Çin Heyeti Geldi, 1-4.
Cumhuriyet. (1934d, 30 Haziran). Çin heyeti Geldi, 5.
Cumhuriyet. (1934e, 2 Ekim) Çin askeri heyetinin ziyareti, 2.
Cumhuriyet. (1934f, 3 Ekim) Çin askeri heyetinin Tetkikleri, 2.
Cumhuriyet. (1935, 28 Ocak). Çin’den Türkiye’ye ilk Elçi, 1-2.
Cumhuriyet. (1935a, 11 Nisan) Çin’in Türkiye’de ilk elçiliği kuruluyor, 1-9.
Cumhuriyet. (1935b, 13 Nisan). Uzakşarkta Uyanış! Çin ulusu
Atatürk’ün çizdiği yoldan Yürümeğe Azmetmiştir, 1-4.
Cumhuriyet. (1935c, 8 Mayıs). İlk Çin elçisi dün gece geldi, 2.
Cumhuriyet. (1935d, 15 Ağustos) Yeni Çin ve Eski Çin, 7.
Cumhuriyet. (1937, 11 Ağustos). Bir Çinli Adana’da Tetkikat yapıyor, 3.
Cumhuriyet. (1938, 14 Nisan) Yeni Çin Maslahatgüzarı, 5.
Cumhuriyet. (1942, 3 Haziran). Milli Şefimiz Çin elçisini Kabul ettiler, , 1.
Ulus. (1935, 17 Mayıs). Çin Elçisi Çankaya’da, 3.
Ulus. (1935a, 18 Mayıs). Çin Elçisinin Söyledikleri, 1-3.
Vatan. (1942, 4 Haziran). Doktor Chang Aramızdan Gidiyor, 1.
Yeni Asır. (1935, 19 Mayıs). Yeni Çin elçisi A. Ajansına diyevi, 3.
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s
Halkçılık and Devletçilik:
A Comparison with
Sun Yat-sen’s Political Thought
Wang Sanyi is a professor in the Department of History, College of Liberal Arts at Shanghai University
and Ph.D. student supervisor. He is also a researcher at the Center for Turkish Studies at Shanghai
University. He is a member of the Association of Modern History of the World in China and the
Association of the Middle East Studies in China. His major research fields include Modern and Con-
temporary History of the World, History of Empires, and History of the Middle East. He has published
several books such as Research on the Late Ottoman Empire (1792-1918), On Britain's Mandate over
the Middle East, Challenges of the Industrial Civilization and Economic Transition in the Middle East
(1809-1938), The Road of Turkey, and more.
Email: sanyiw@163.com
Wang Sanyi
Prof. Dr.
Department of History,
Shanghai University, China
Peer-Reviewed Article
How to cite: Wang, S. (2021/2022). Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s halkçılık and devletçilik: A
comparison with Sun Yat-sen’s political thought. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 40-49.
41
Wang Sanyi - Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s Halkçılık and Devletçilik: A Comparison with SunYat-sen’s Political Thought
ABSTRACT
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Sun Yat-sen are both great men who overturned the old system to open a
new era and have ideas and guidelines for governing countries. Among the six principles of Kemalism,
Halkçılık and Devletçilik have similar contents to Sun Yat-sen's The Principle of Democracy and The
Principle of Livelihood. Kemal Atatürk does not literally mention "civil rights" and "people’s livelihood”
in six principles, but in Halkçılık asserts “people’s rule” rather than autocracy, advocates that power comes
from the people, and that the responsibility of the government is to seek welfare for the people. Kemal
Atatürk’s Devletçilik focuses on the state-led planned economy and protecting the private property of
farmers, like in Sun Yat-sen’s Thought of Livelihood. This paper consists of three parts. The first part
compares Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Sun Yat-sen’s main contributions and key thoughts, the second part
Halkçılık and Devletçilik of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Sun Yat-sen’s corresponding thought, and the
third part the historical background and objective conditions of their ideas.
Keywords: Comparison, devletçilik, halkçılık, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, Sun Yat-sen
Introduction
MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATÜRK IS A WELL-KNOWN
historical figure in Turkey, just as Sun Yat-sen is
in China. The similarities between the two figures
are clear. First, they were both Republic Founders,
the Republic of Turkey in 1923 and the Republic
of China in 1912. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk is
known as the “father of the Turks”, his surname,
Atatürk, was given to him by the Grand National
Assembly of Turkey. Sun Yat-sen is known as “the
father of the Nations” in the Republic of China
since he was its first provisional president.
Second, they both contributed to eradicating
the “Empire system” and overthrew the old order
(the Ottoman Empire and the Qing Dynasty).
Third, they had ideas and outlines of how to
rule the state. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk had the
“The Principles of Kemalism” (Tongas, 1939), and
Sun’s political philosophy is known as the “Three
Principles of the People”: that is, The Principle of
Nationalism, The Principle of Democracy, and
The Principle of Livelihood.
Fourth, both suffered troubles with their
health from great causes. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
lived to 57 years old (1881-1938), and Sun Yat-
sen lived to 59 years old (1866-1925).
Fifth, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Sun Yat-sen
are figures of charisma for respectively producing
moral power among the people of their countries.
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Sun Yat-sen are
great men with far-reaching influence, meaning
research on them has been very abundant. In
terms of materials, Atatürk’s articles and works,
42
personal notes, speeches, letters, conversation
records, and public government archives are
very rich as “original materials”. There are
countless biographies of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk.
The existing research involves Atatürk’s policy,
thought, diplomacy, contributions, and all
aspects of his daily life. In Chinese books, like
the “History of the Middle East” (Zhi, 2010),
more emphasis is placed on the achievements of
Atatürk’s revolution and modernization reform.
Sun Yat-sen left many first-hand materials,
such as letters, speeches, conversations,
writings, and telegrams. There are also many
kinds of biographies and papers on Sun Yat-
sen too. Only Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and
Sun Yat-sen’s political thoughts are taken
as an example in this paper, especially
regarding their similarities and differences.
Main Contributions and Key Thought
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk established the Re-
public of Turkey and carried out successful refor-
ms (Kinross, 2002). In detail, his historical cont-
ributions can be summarized as follows:
1) He successfully led the national liberation
movement, won national independence, and sa-
feguarded Turkey’s national dignity and sovere-
ignty.
2) The Republic of Turkey was founded, the
sultanate and the Caliphate system were abolis-
hed, and the constitution of the Republic of Tur-
key was promulgated, which laid the foundation
for democracy and modernization.
3) He developed the national economy and
promoted economic modernization with natio-
nalist policy.
4) He reformed education and the Turkish alp-
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (Atatürk website, 2021) Sun Yat-sen (China Daily, 2019)
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
43
Wang Sanyi - Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s Halkçılık and Devletçilik: A Comparison with SunYat-sen’s Political Thought
habet, which improved the nation’s culture and
trained a large number of professional workers
and artists.
5) Through the reform of social customs, su-
perstition was eliminated, science was promo-
ted, polygamy was prohibited, women were gi-
ven the right to vote, and the secularization of
social life was realized.
In a word, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk played a
central role in the creation of modern Turkey.
Sun Yat-sen was a pioneer of China’s de-
mocratic revolution. He first held the banner
of anti-Qing and anti-feudalism movements,
launched multiple armed uprisings, organized
revolutionary political parties, and led the revo-
lution of 1911; he founded the Republic of Chi-
na, overthrew feudal autocracy, and promulga-
ted the Provisional Constitution of the Republic
of China, which rooted the concept of Republic
deeply in the hearts of the people. However, Sun
Yat-sen had not finished his cause when he died.
Atatürk’s thought and governing program,
the famous “The Principles of Kemalism”, was
gradually formed in practice from 1919 to 1931.
After 1931, “six arrows” were used to represent
the “six principles” of the party platform of the
Republican people’s party. These became “the
Principles of Kemalism”, also known as “Atatürk-
çülük” in Turkish or “Atatürkism” in English.
The “six principles” are summarized as fol-
lows:
1) Republicanism, Cumhuriyetçilik in Tur-
kish, represents the republican system instead of
monarchy, reflecting the principle of “the rule of
the people” rather than individual dictatorship.
2) Nationalism, Milliyetçilik in Turkish, me-
ans Turkey’s territorial integrity, Turkey’s natio-
nal independence, and its position in the inter-
national community.
3) Populism1 , Halkçılık in Turkish, refers
to state power belonging to the people (power
comes from the people), everyone equal before
the law, the government as the government of
the people that seeks welfare for all, objection to
privileges, opposition to the division of Turkish
society into different classes.
4) Reformism, İnkılapçılık in Turkish, also
translated as “Revolutionism”, means a constant
re-evaluation of the status quo to actively forge
ahead and unremittingly carry out social and
economic reform.
5) Laicism, Lâiklik in Turkish, includes poli-
tical and religious separation, opposing the in-
terference of religious forces in state power (re-
move the interference and restraint of religion
in politics), the secularization of law, education,
and social life, and abolishing religious privile-
ges.
6) Statism, Devletçilik in Turkish, addresses
state intervention in the economy, the encou-
ragement of private businesses, development
of the national economy independently, with
“Monopoly” in some areas. The goal is to realize
independence, freedom, and equality in Turkey
and the civilization and progress of Turkish so-
ciety (Xian, 2001).
Sun Yat-sen’s thought and governing prog-
ram, “Three Principles of the People”, was put
forward by Sun himself and included different
contents.
Sun Yat-sen’s thought and
governing program,“Three
Principles of the People”, was
put forward by Sun himself and
included different contents.
1 Editor’s Note (Ed.N.):“Populism”inTurkey is different from that of other countries. In general, this word includes pejorative meanings, however, inTurkey it has
positive meaning which refers to prioritizing of public interest.
44
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
1) The Principle of Nationalism is to oppose
the rule of Manchu, the Qing Dynasties, and the
aggression of foreign powers, overthrow war-
lords, seek the equality of all ethnic groups in
China, and recognize the right of national sel-
f-determination.
2) The Principle of Democracy refers to the
implementation of democratic politics shared
by ordinary civilians. The government has the
power of legislation, judicature, administration,
examination, and supervision so that the peop-
le have the power of election, recall, creation,
and referendum. It emphasizes the distinction
between direct civil rights and power, that is,
that the government has governance and the pe-
ople have political power.
3) The most important part, The Principle of
livelihood, includes: first, average land owners-
hip and, second, the control of capital, meaning
private individuals cannot manipulate the peop-
le's livelihood (Xian, 1948).
Sun Yat-sen envisioned that through imple-
menting the Three Principles of People, “people
make the best of their talents, places, things and
goods” (Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,
Institute of Modern History ed.,1981a). All ai-
ming towards making the country rich, the pe-
ople strong, and the whole world as one com-
munity. Sun Yat-sen once explained that every
country must follow its own methods when de-
aling with livelihood problems, not necessarily
imitating the West because Western countries
have not solved their own problems and the Ku-
omintang can solve the livelihood problem of
the Chinese people through equal land owner-
ship and capital control (Wells, 2001).
Atatürk’s and Sun Yat-sen’s thoughts have the
same goals that reflect national desires to beco-
me rich and strong from poverty and the urgent
requirement to integrate into the mainstream
civilization of the world.
Ataturk in Ankara (Atatürk website, 2021)
45
Wang Sanyi - Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s Halkçılık and Devletçilik: A Comparison with SunYat-sen’s Political Thought
A Comparison of Halkçılık and Devletçilik
Referring to Sun Yat-sen's “Three Principles of
People”, we see that only “Nationalism” among
the six principles of Kemalism is the same as Sun
Yat-sen’s “Nationalism”. However, their respecti-
ve definitions and applications of “Nationalism”
varies greatly. Despite this, Halkçılık and Devlet-
çilik have similar contents to Sun Yat Sen’s The
Principle of Democracy and The Principle of
Livelihood, which this paper focuses on compa-
ring.
Sun Yat-sen’s nationalist thought has gone th-
rough an evolution process. At first, it was “pla-
toon Manchu”, which proposed “expelling Tartar
prisoners and restoring China” by focusing on an
anti-Manchu rule. Later, he abandoned the simp-
le “Han chauvinism” and emphasized the “five
ethnic republics”. In a speech in 1924, there was
a new interpretation of nationalism, which inc-
luded opposing the aggression of foreign powers
and recognizing the right of national self-deter-
mination. Sun Yat-sen’s nationalism is relative to
cosmopolitanism. In Sun Yat-sen’s view, the way
to restore the national spirit is to catch up, make
yourself strong, and maintain due independence.
When you become strong, you should “help the
weak and help the lean, do our national duty, and
use the inherent moral peace as the foundation
to unify the world and become a rule of great
harmony” (Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,
Institute of Modern History ed., 1981b).
“Nationalism” in Kemalism is the most comp-
lex of the six principles; it cannot be explained in
a few words. After the disintegration of the mul-
ti-ethnic empire, the Turks could only establish
their own Republic. Its territory was dominated
by Anatolia and Eastern Thrace, meaning the
residents were limited to Turkish speakers and a
few Armenians and Kurds. In fact, the Republic
of Turkey had undergone “national reconstru-
ction” before it became the Turkish nation that
nationalism defined in the constitution. In his
speeches in March 1922 and March 1923, Mus-
tafa Kemal Atatürk focused on his national view,
defining the relationship between “Turkish nati-
onal tradition” and “Islam”, and put forward the
goal of rebuilding the “Turkish Identity”. Mustafa
Kemal Atatürk separated the “Turkish nation and
its history” from those complex thoughts and
ideas (Tao, 2011). To reconstruct national iden-
tity, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and the historians
who supported him created a “Turkish view of
history” by studying Turkey’s early history, com-
piling history textbooks, and holding a history
conference.
Among the six principles of Kemalism, there
are similar contents to Sun Yat-sen’s “civil rights”
and “people’s livelihood”. Regarding civil rights
and people’s livelihood, Sun emphasized eradica-
ting the idea of imperial power and returning the
government to the people. He also emphasized
solving the basic survival problems of the people
and put forward that “the first priority of cons-
truction lies in people’s livelihood”. In the “six
principles” of Kemalism, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
did not literally mention “civil rights” and “pe-
ople’s livelihood” in six principles but asserted
“people’s rule” rather than autocracy in “Repub-
licanism”. He also advocated in “Populism” that
power comes from the people and that it is the
Among the six principles of
Kemalism, there are similar
contents to Sun Yat-sen’s“civil
rights”and“people’s livelihood”.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
46
responsibility of the government to seek welfa-
re for all, which is consistent with Sun Yat-sen’s
principle of “civil rights”.
Sun Yat-sen’s thoughts on “civil rights” are very
precious. The Five Power Constitution proposed
by Sun refers to the separation of legislative, ad-
ministrative, and judicial powers in Western
countries, drawing lessons from the examination
and supervision system in China’s ancient politi-
cal system. He created two powers of examination
and supervision, which is unique in the history of
world political thought. Sun Yat-sen’s understan-
ding of “civil rights” is that “Managing people’s
affairs is politics. Having the power to manage
people’s affairs is political power. Today, mana-
ging political affairs with the people is called ci-
vil rights” (Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,
Institute of Modern History ed., 1981c). Sun Yat-
sen’s view of history is as follows: people compete
for power with the monarch, resulting in revolu-
tion; in the era of civil rights, good people fought
with evil people, justice fought with power, and
civil rights gradually developed. Civil rights ad-
vocate equality in political status. It is necessary
to break the monarchy and make everyone equ-
al. Therefore, civil rights correspond to equality
(Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Institute of
Modern History ed., 1981d). This truth is conci-
se, easy to understand, and thorough.
In Atatürk’s reform, the reform of the legal
system was put at the core, and legal means were
used to protect civil rights, the safety of people’s
lives and property, and people’s right to education
and development. The State encourages the priva-
te economy and protects the private property of
farmers. The Izmir economic conference in 1923
discussed this national economic development
by formulating national economic policy, encou-
raging the development of private enterprises in
Turkey, implementing the protective tariff policy,
and establishing the national bank. From 1927 to
1929, the land law was passed to distribute land
Atatürk in Dolmabahçe Palace (Atatürk website, 2021)
47
Wang Sanyi - Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s Halkçılık and Devletçilik: A Comparison with SunYat-sen’s Political Thought
to landless farmers. The government encouraged
industrial mechanization and established credit
and sales cooperatives (Berberoglu, 1982). After
1929, Turkey adopted the Soviet model and imp-
lemented the policy of state intervention in the
economy. Obviously, the issues of “civil rights”
and “people’s livelihood” in Atatürk’s principles
summarize the experience of the Turkish gover-
nment in the process of institutional reform and
national construction.
In contrast, while Sun Yat-sen’s thoughts on
“civil rights” and “people’s livelihood” are reaso-
nable, they are just his personal ideas. After the
northern expedition, the Kuomintang gained na-
tional power and respected Sun Yat-sen’s “Three
Principles of People” in theory rather than in pra-
ctice. In fact, it neither promoted civil rights nor
solved the problem of people’s livelihood.
In short, Kemalism is a summary of practical
political practice, which is to the point and easy
to operate. Mustafa Kemal’s Halkçılık and Dev-
letçilik have been put into practice and achieved
results. Although Sun Yat-sen’s “Three Principles
of People” are systematic, comprehensive, thou-
ghtful, and farsighted, Sun Yat-sen’s thoughts on
“civil rights” and “people’s livelihood” were never
put into practice.
Comparison Based on Their Historical
Backgrounds
To compare the similarities and differences
between Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Sun Yat-
sen’s political thoughts, we should analyze their
historical background and basic conditions.
First, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and his suppor-
ters completed the multiple tasks of dynastic,
institutional, and social change. The most critical
reforms were at the political level. Mustafa Ke-
mal Atatürk realized one “replacement” and two
“separations”. The “replacement” was the well-
known “replacing the sultanate with the repub-
lican system”. The first “separation” was the rapid
realization of “separation of politics and religion”,
the breakdown of intervention by religious forces
in the political field to realize secularization. The
second “separation” was the gradual realization
of the “separation of military and government”.
When founding the Republic of Turkey, most of
the political elites were soldiers. Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk and İsmet Bey set an example, took off
their military uniforms and engaged in full-time
political work or foreign affairs. It also stipulates
that the officers in parliament must withdraw
from military posts and realize the civilian lea-
dership of the military.
Next, we should highlight more differences
between these two important historical figures.
Sun Yat-sen’s revolutionary activities were
early, but until his death in 1925, “the revolu-
tion was not successful”. Mustafa Kemal Ata-
türk led the war of national independence and
achieved success in more than three years. Sun
Yat-sen was inspired by Atatürk’s success and
Turkey’s victory. Sun Yat-sen’s article praised the
1908 Turkish Revolution to inspire Chinese re-
volutionary martyrs. Atatürk’s starting point is
very different from Sun Yat-sen. When Mustafa
Kemal Atatürk led the national independence
movement, he was already a senior military ge-
neral and a member of the Ottoman Parliament
(constitutional monarchy from 1908 to 1918).
Mustafa Kemal’s Halkçılık and
Devletçilik have been put into
practice and achieved results.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
48
Sun Yat-sen’s revolutionary activities relied on
his ambition and talent, which experienced
many failures.
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was a great politici-
an and strategist, and his personal quality, ta-
lent, and perseverance are undeniably superior.
However, there are some objective conditions
for his success: first, the Ottoman Empire col-
lapsed, so Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s mission was
to save the Turkish nation. Second, the humili-
ation of the Ottoman Sultan government made
the “light” of the Sultan and the Caliph no longer
as dazzling as before, and the difficulty and re-
sistance of abolishing the two systems were gre-
atly reduced. Third, the westernization reform
practice of the late Ottoman Empire made the
concept of Western civilization go deep into the
minds of intellectuals. In particular, the second
constitutional government (1908-1918) directly
reserved and trained several leading cadres for
the Republic of Turkey, including Mustafa Ke-
mal Atatürk himself.
In contrast, Sun Yat-sen was not as lucky as
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Sun Yat-sen’s task was
too ambitious: to establish a republic on a vast
territory and change the fate of more than 400
million people of dozens of ethnic groups such
as Han, Mongolian, Hui, etc. Moreover, Sun Yat-
sen was not a soldier and had no army at first
(Huangpu Military Academy was established
only in 1924). He was not in the government and
had no social status. In the face of a fragmented
society and a huge illiterate group, Sun Yat-sen’s
revolution was much more difficult. Sun Yat-sen
did not have political resources (power, soci-
al status, etc.) and just relied on one belief and
constant persuasion. Therefore, Sun Yat-sen is
not comparable to Mustafa Kemal Atatürk on
this point.
Third, when commenting on these two histo-
rical figures, we should take an attitude of trans-
cending utilitarianism. Sun Yat-sen and Mustafa
Kemal Atatürk are both magnanimous leaders
who did not care about fame and wealth, perso-
nal gains, or losses. According to the standard
of Chinese historian Qian Mu’s evaluation of
historical figures, Sun Yat-sen and Mustafa Ke-
mal Atatürk were born at the end of the world
as “figures with performance”. Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk was a successful figure, and Sun Yat-sen
was an unsuccessful figure, but his influence was
still great.
Atatürk’s political practice was unique and
has a prominent position in world history. Sun
Yat-sen was erudite and knowledgeable, had
great feelings, was generous, and understood the
nature of civilians. He dared to be the first and
was resolute, optimistic, visionary, and calm in
the case of setbacks and change. His spirit and
personality are admirable. Sun Yat-sen’s pursuit
to strive and build a new China with “the most
enlightened politics and the most comfortable
people” is so lofty and beautiful a goal that it is
worth fighting for (Sun, 2011).
Conclusion
Contemporary Turks can openly talk about
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, question the “Atatürk
era”, and even criticize his doctrine as Turkey’s
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was a
great politician and strategist,
and his personal quality, talent,
and perseverance are undeniably
superior.
49
Wang Sanyi - Mustafa Kemal Atatürk’s Halkçılık and Devletçilik: A Comparison with SunYat-sen’s Political Thought
progress. His reform was successful, because he
carried out sweeping institutional changes and
transformed other aspects of society. The goal of
Atatürk’s reform was to move towards a modern
civilized society. The reform of educational con-
cepts and methods gave birth to a huge knowle-
dgeable group in Turkish society, brought up ci-
tizens with independent personalities, and made
them the cornerstone of modern civilized society
in Turkey. Sun Yat-sen’s goals and aspirations
were similar, but they were never truly realized.
We should understand the historical background
and the special situation faced by Sun Yat-sen at
that time when evaluating his success and look to
his influence and ideas instead.
Decades later, the Chinese revolution led by
Mao Zedong won a victory and established an in-
dependent People’s Republic in China. The Chi-
nese Communists believe in Marxism, absorb the
tradition of Chinese civilization, and recognize
that the Three Principles of People are the poli-
tical basis of the Anti-Japanese national united
front. Sun Yat Sen’s thought had an important
influence on Mao Zedong’s new democratic the-
ory. The success of Mao Zedong’s revolutionary
practice made Sun Yat Sen’s last wish to establish
a nation-state and strive for freedom and democ-
racy came true in China, while Atatürk’s legacy was
abandoned due to Turkey’s integration into the At-
lantic System and the fact that Atatürk’s legacy was
wrongfully interpreted as Westernization. Although
Turkey and China are both Asian countries, their
development paths are different.
On the comparison between Sun Yat Sen and
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, academic papers and works
have been published. For example, the article “The
Evolution of Turkish Nationalism: An Unconventi-
onal Approach Based on a Comparative and Inter-
national Perspective” by Efe Can Gürcan, focuses
on the similarities and differences between Sun Yat
Sen’s nationalism and Atatürk’s nationalism (Gür-
can, 2010). For us, the thoughts of these two great
figures need further reading and thinking on the
basis of this paper.
References
Berberoglu, B. (1982). The Turkey In Crisis: From State Capitalism to
Neo-colonialism. London: Zed Press, 27-28.
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Institute of Modern History ed.
(1981a). Complete Works of Sun Yat-sen. Beijing: Zhonghua Book
Company.
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Institute of Modern History
ed. (1981b). Sun Yat-sen’s Speech: Three principles of people.
Complete Works of Sun Yat-sen. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company.
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Institute of Modern History
ed. (1981c). Sun Yat-sen’s Speech: Three principles of people.
Complete Works of Sun Yat-sen. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company.
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Institute of Modern History
ed. (1981d). Sun Yat-sen’s Speech: Three principles of people.
Complete Works of Sun Yat-sen. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company.
Gürcan C. E. (2010). The Evolution of Turkish Nationalism: An
Unconventional Approach Based on a Comparative and
International Perspective. In Beyond imagined uniqueness:
Nationalisms in contemporary perspectives (Joan B. & William. G.
ed.). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, p. 141-169.
Kinross, P. (2002). Atatürk- The Rebirth of a Nation, London:
Phoenix Publishing.
Sun, Y. (2011). General Strategy for the Founding of the People’s
Republic of China. Beijing: China Chang’an Publishing House.
Tao, Z. (2011). Modern States and Nation Building: A Study
on Turkish Nationalism in the Early 20th Century. Peking: Sanlian
Bookstore Press.
Tongas, G. (1939). Atatürk and the True Nature of Modern Turkey
(F. F. Rynd trans.) London: Luzac & Co.
Wells, A. (2001). The Political Thought of Sun Yat-sen. London:
Regent’s College London Press.
Xian, C.S. (1948). Selected works of Sun Yat-sen. Shanghai: Cultural
Supply Society.
Xian, X. (2001). Kemal Reform in Turkey. Nanjing: Nanjing
University Press.
Zhi, P. S. (2010). History of the Middle East. Beijing: People’s
Publishing House.
The Establishment of Diplomatic
Relations Between the Republic of
Turkey and the People’s Republic of
China (1960-1971)*
Dr. Barış Adıbelli graduated from Selçuk University, Department of Public Administration in 1999.
He completed his master’s degree in the Department of International Relations at the Social Sciences
Institute of the Middle East Technical University in 2002, and his doctorate in the Department of In-
ternational Relations at the Social Sciences Institute of Ankara University in 2009. His academic stu-
dies focus on the Asia-Pacific region and especially on Chinese foreign policy. He is currently a faculty
member in the Department of Political Science and International Relations at Kütahya Dumlupınar
University.
Email: baris.adibelli@dpu.edu.tr
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4270-9312
Barış Adıbellİ
Asst.Prof.
Department of Political Science and International Relations,
Kütahya Dumlupınar University, Turkey
*Translation: Anıl Solmaz
Peer-Reviewed Article
How to cite: Adıbelli, B. (2021/2022). The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the
Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971). Belt & Road Initiative
Quarterly, 3(1), 50-73.
51
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
ABSTRACT
This study examines the process leading to the establishment of relations between Turkey and China on the
occasion of the 50th anniversary of this development. One could argue that the relationship between the
twoancientcountriesofAsiaandtheirpeoplewasestablishedthroughaverydifficultprocessshapedbythe
Cold War environment. Establishing a diplomatic relationship between the two countries, which were in
differentideologicalcamps,wasanextremelychallengingtaskinaColdWarclimate.Itisimportanttopoint
out that opposition to communism, which used to dominate Turkish politics and society, constitutes the
main obstacle to the establishment of connections between the two countries in this period. Therefore, this
article focuses on ideological and political dynamics. Undoubtedly, the political climate created by the 1971
militarymemorandumwasanimportantlandmarkinthisprocess.Ontheotherhand,China’smembership
intheUnitedNationsandTaiwan’s(NationalistChina)removalfromtheUnitedNations–alongsideTurkey’s
stanceinthisprocess–playedanimportantroleintheestablishmentofrelationsbetweenthetwocountries.
Keywords: China, Cyprus, Taiwan, the USA, Turkey
Introduction
THIS STUDY EXAMINES THE PROCESS
leadıng to the establishment of relations
between Turkey and China on the occasion
of the 50th anniversary of this development.
One could argue that the relationship between
the two ancient countries of Asia and their
people was established through a very difficult
process shaped by the Cold War environment.
Establishing a diplomatic relationship between
the two countries, which were in different
ideological camps, was an extremely challenging
task in a Cold War climate. It is important
to point out that opposition to communism,
which used to dominate Turkish politics and
society, constitutes the main obstacle to the
establishment of connections between the two
countries in this period. Therefore, this article
focuses on ideological and political dynamics.
The reunion of the two former neighbors in
the westernmost and the easternmost parts of
Asia on the political plane actually meant the end
of the Cold War between the two countries. This
was a time when China’s relations, not only with
Turkey but also with the rest of the world, began
to normalize. Moreover, Turkey was witnessing
the beginning of a new era in its foreign policy
since the 1970s. The first fruits of this new era
were born with the normalization of relations
with China and the Cyprus Peace Operation.
To understand this process of normalization in
the 1970s, it is necessary to consider Turkey’s
changing stance in international politics since
the Menderes period. From 1950 to 1971,
Turkey faced military intervention twice. The
first generated a military coup, whereas the
second resulted in a memorandum that led
to a new civilian government. However, these
interventions did not cause an axis shift in
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
52
Turkey’s foreign policy.
China and Turkey came to the stage of
establishing diplomatic relations in 1971 by
going through a very difficult ordeal. After
the Second World War, Turkey preferred the
Western Bloc and established closer relations
with this camp in the 1950s. Similarly, the
People’s Republic of China was established in
1949 and became an important member of
the Eastern Bloc. The first encounter between
Turkey and China in the Cold War climate was
observed in the Korean War, the first and last
hot conflict of this period. Turkey participated
in the Korean War as a combatant among the
countries led by the USA, called the “Free
World”, and fought alongside the USA against
North Korean troops and Chinese volunteers.
While the war was still going on, Turkey was
also accepted into NATO, the military pact of
the Western Bloc.
The Menderes Period
The experience of Turkey’s multi-party political
system, which started in 1946, exerted a
significant influence on Turkish foreign policy
Menderes period - American aid agreement signed in 1947 (July 13, 1947, Cumhuriyet).
53
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
characterized by the establishment of closer
relations with the United States of America
(USA). The signing of 4 bilateral agreements in
the military field between Turkey and the USA
(Common Security Agreement-1951, NATO
Status of Forces Agreement-1952, Military
Facilities Agreement-1954, Tax Exemptions
Agreement-1954) is a strong indication of this
development in the first half of the 1950s (Oran,
2001: 555-559). In this period, the Menderes
government followed the example of the USA
and recognized the government of Chiang Kai-
shek, namely the Republic of China, located in
the island of Taiwan, instead of the communist
government established on the mainland.
Between 1950 and 1960, the Menderes
government adopted all the policies of the
Western Bloc, especially its Middle Eastern
policy. In this context, Turkey took part in all
the Atlantic initiatives geared towards the US
policy of encircling the Soviet Union, such as
the Baghdad Pact (later named Central Treaty
Organization, CENTO). In this period, the
USA was seen as an important security pillar
of Turkey against the Soviet Union, as well
as the main financial pillar and source of the
Menderes government’s economic and social
policies aimed at transforming Turkey into a
“Little America”.
In 1955, Turkey was invited as the guest of
honor to the Bandung Conference. However,
due to Turkey’s defense of the USA and the
WesternBloc,thiscausedagreatdisappointment
for other countries participating in the
congress, especially for India which had great
sympathy for Turkey. In addition, the Turkish
delegation made its first contact ever with the
Chinese communists led by Zhou Enlai at this
conference (Bağcı, 1990: 61-63). However,
despite these developments, the Menderes
government continued to evaluate China as
part of the so-called “red threat”, a concept that
was prevalent in the Western Bloc. During this
period, Menderes supported Chinese Taiwan
and South Korea, visited these countries and
gave a speech in their parliaments. Although
Mao and his friends had a deep respect for
Turkey and the Turkish people, they did not
hesitate to criticize the Menderes government.
In many instances, especially in the Middle
East, both countries took opposing positions.
For example, in 1957, as tensions rose between
Turkey and Syria, China took a position against
Turkey, which was supported by the USA. Syria
was supported by the Soviet Union (Adıbelli,
2016:194-197).
Starting from the mid-1950s, however,
Turkey’s economic policies took a sharp turn.
The Menderes government no long received the
loans expected from the USA, and this situation
pushed the government to look for new sources
of funding. In this context, Japan, South Korea,
Chinese Taiwan and even later the European
Economic Community were seen as new
sources of economic support for the Menderes
government. The negative experiences in
relation to economic issues with the USA were
actually the first breaking point in Turkey-
US relations. This break led Menderes to
development its commercial relations with the
The negative experiences in
relation to economic issues with
the USA were actually the first
breaking point in Turkey-US
relations. This break led Menderes
to development its commercial
relations with the Soviet Union.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
54
Soviet Union. On April 11, 1960, the Turkish
Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that
Prime Minister Menderes would visit Moscow
upon Khrushchev’s invitation. According to
the statement, Menderes’ visit should have
been held in July, and Khrushchev would visit
Turkey after this visit (Cumhuriyet, 12 April
1960:1). While Prime Minister Menderes was
preparing to visit the Soviet Union, he was
overthrown by a military coup on 27 May 1960.
He was executed on 17 September 1961. One
of the general opinions regarding the causes
of the May 27 military coup is that there was
a US conspiracy against Menderes’ efforts to
normalize Turkish-Soviet relations.
Turkish-Chinese Relations
after the May 27 Coup
As the May 27, 1960 coup started a new era
in Turkey, there were also important develop-
ments in the Eastern Bloc. The 1960s were seen
as a period of détente between the Western
Bloc and the Eastern Bloc. In the meantime,
this period was also characterized by growing
disagreements and disintegration within the
Eastern Bloc. The Sino-Soviet conflict, which
began in 1956 with Khrushchev’s criticism of
Letter from US President Johnson to Prime Minister İnönü, warning Turkey about the intervention in Cyprus
(Hürriyet, 13 January 1966).
55
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
Stalin, became more pronounced in the 1960s.
In the border conflict between China and India
in 1962 (Hillam, 1966: 95-102), the Soviet Uni-
on openly supported India. The border disputes
that broke out in 1969 between China and the
Soviet Union was the last straw between the two
countries (Robinson, 1972: 1175-1202).
While this was happening in the Eastern
Bloc, there were also important developments
in Turkey. Between 1950 and 1960, Turkey, whi-
ch acted together with the USA in the policy of
containing the Soviet Union, took active part
in international and regional organizations and
attempted to pursue an effective foreign policy
in the Middle East region, giving greater impor-
tance to its own foreign policy priorities. In this
context, Turkey adopted a more introverted but
non-aggressive, more defensive foreign policy
approach.
Although the easing of hostility between
the blocks started in this period, this tendency
was not reflected in Turkey. In fact, this period
in Turkey was the most affected by the rivalry
between the blocks. It faced the indirect threat
of the Soviet leader Khrushchev due to the U-2
spy plane incident which first took off at Incir-
lik base and then was shot down on Soviet soil.
It became the subject of bargaining outside of
Turkey, and as a result of this negotiation, Jupi-
ter missiles were removed from Turkey in 1963
(Hale, 2003: 135-139).
While all this was going on, there occurred
an important development in Cyprus. Ankara
increasingly grew concerned about the frequent
violation of the rights of the Turkish commu-
nity in the island and increasing Greek inter-
ventionism in the island since 1960. The Cyp-
rus problem quickly became an international
problem. The international community stood
with the Greek Cypriot theses, and while Tur-
key devoted its efforts to bringing the rights of
the Turkish Cypriots to the forefront on almost
every platform, which eventually failed. Moreo-
ver, during this process, violent attacks against
the Turkish community in Cyprus had already
begun. These developments brought along dis-
cussions about intervening on the island within
the scope of Turkey’s rights arising from the gu-
arantor agreement (Bölükbaşı, 2001: 57-142).
Finally, what happened in Cyprus started a
process in which a possible Turkish interven-
tion in the island became a necessity in 1964.
Prime Minister İnönü’s intention to intervene
found an echo in the White House shortly, and
then US President Johnson sent his famous let-
ter, which went down in history as the Johnson
Letter warning Turkey against intervention, on
5 June 1964. In the letter, the USA openly thre-
atened Turkey, contrary to the spirit of alliance
between the two countries, and stated that the
USA and NATO would not help Turkey against
a possible Soviet attack. At the same time, the
letter made it clear that Turkey could not use
American weapons in a possible conflict (John-
son & İnönü, 1966: 386-388).
The letter caused a great reaction against the
USA on the part of Turkey. In response to the
In Johnson's letter, the USA openly
threatened Turkey, contrary to
the spirit of alliance between
the two countries, and stated that
the USA and NATO would not help
Turkey against a possible Soviet
attack.
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
56
US attitude, Turkey considered to recognize the
People’s Republic of China and the develop-
ment of relations with the Soviet Union. In this
context, on October 30, 1964, after 23 years, Fo-
reign Minister Erkin became the highest-level
Turkish official who visited the Soviet Union
(Cumhuriyet, October 31, 1964:1). In addition,
after a long hiatus in 1964, the cocktail party
held at the Turkish embassy in Moscow on
29 October Republic Day included the Soviet
side. As a result, Johnson’s letter caused Turkey
to seriously reconsider its relations with the
United States for the first time and crossed an
important threshold in recognizing China. At
the same time, 1964 was the year when Turkey
adopted a multi-faceted foreign policy.
In fact, one should also note that “attempts
to recognize China were conceived by the State
Department bureaucracy in 1963–64. The coa-
lition government headed by İsmet İnönü was
preparing for this issue. Suat Hayri Ürgüplü’s
government, which came after him, also made
serious preparations on this path. However, the
Justice Party under the leadership of Süleyman
Demirel, which came to power alone in 1965
and was seeing itself as the continuation of the
Democratic Party, undermined the recogniti-
on of China due to its policies in line with the
USA” (Cumhuriyet, August 6, 1971: 1).
Statements by Chinese Prime Minister
Zhou Enlai about Turkey
While these changes were taking place in Turkey,
China was also closely followed the developments
in Turkey. Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enlai
made a surprise statement to Turkish journalists
he received in Beijing on April 13, 1965, stating
that China wants to establish relations with
Turkey. Zhou Enlai told Turkish journalists the
following about the relations between Turkey
and China:
There is no problem for us in establishing
relations between Turkey and China. First,
we can establish scientific and economic
relations. Then we can start semi-official
contacts. Both China and Turkey are Asian
countries. There is a very old and deep
connection between them in terms of history
and culture. We know that the Turkish and
Chinese peoples have established a traditional
friendship. Relations between China and
Turkey should be established by considering
the principles of the Bandung Conference,
such as territorial integrity, equality and living
in peace. With this visit of yours, the first step
of the friendship to be established between the
two countries has been taken (Statement by
Zhou Enlai to Akşam, 1965: 82).
The main concern of Turkish journalists was
the Cyprus problem, and China’s point of view
on this issue was a matter of curiosity. Chinese
Prime Minister Zhou said that the problem
merged as a result of imperialist policies
followed by Western countries and said, “In
The main concern of Turkish
journalists was the Cyprus
problem, and China’s point of
view on this issue was a matter of
curiosity. Chinese Prime Minister
Zhou said that the problem merged
as a result of imperialist policies
followed by Western countries.
57
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
order to find a solution to this issue, the aims of
imperialism should be eliminated and peaceful
negotiations should be held, taking into account
the interests of the nations involved (Turkish
and Greek communities)” (Statement by Zhou
Enlai to Akşam, 1965:83). The Chinese Prime
Minister also asserted that he would do his best
to improve the negotiations at the Conference
of Asian-African Countries, which was seen as
a continuation of the Bandung Conference, the
first step of which was planned to be held in
Algeria as a solution to the problem:
I learned that Turkish State Representatives
will come to the Asia-African Countries Summit
Conference to be held in Algeria this summer.
I will meet with Turkish representatives at
this Conference. Makarios is coming to this
conference. I am sure that it will be beneficial
for me to see the Turkish representatives there
and learn their views on the Cyprus issue. As I
said before, the Cyprus issue should be resolved
peacefully, taking into account the interests of
the communities. (Statement by Zhou Enlai to
Akşam, 1965).
In addition, Zhou Enlai saw the conference in
Algeria as a platform where he could meet and
exchange views with the Turkish delegation.
However, this meeting did not take place
because the Conference of Asian-African States
was postponed indefinitely and later cancelled.
The Chinese Premier pointed out that the
relations between the two countries should be
normalized primarily through semi-official
contacts between the peoples, journalists,
scientists, and economists. The Chinese Prime
Minister, in his response to the question of
what kind of results would be achieved in the
establishment of diplomatic relations between
China and Turkey, said the following:
Both China and Turkey are Asian countries.
There is a traditional friendship between
the Turkish and Chinese nations. Both of
our countries have suffered from imperialist
rape and oppression. We both now face the
common task of reinforcing our national
independence and increasing Asian-African
cooperation. We believe that Turkey and
China will be founded on the “Five Principles”
(respect for each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, mutual acceptance of
non-aggression, non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs, equality and mutual
benefits, living together in peace) and the
Ten Principles of the Bandung Conference.
Normal relations will be in accordance with
the interests of both the two nations and
the Asian nations. We recently learned that:
“The Turkish government leaders and the
public have expressed their desire to improve
relations with our country. In our view, this
shows that they respect the facts and value
the cohesion between Asian countries. We
welcome this indication. (Statement by Zhou
Enlai to Akşam, 1965: 84).
In the statements made so far, Zhou never
voiced inter-bloc politics, any stance or policy
against the Soviet Union or the USA, or even
Turkey’s position within the Western bloc. For
example, while talking about the development
of economic and cultural ties between the two
countries, emphasizing that this situation would
be beneficial for the two countries, he stated,
“(…) mutual aid should be strengthened with
other Asian-African countries and engaged in
the struggle for knowledge and experience.” He
referred to the Third World policy of China at
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
58
that time, and in a way tried to encourage Turkey
to support this Third World policy. Therefore,
he stressed China’s intention to establish and
develop relations with Turkey on new grounds,
not within the bipolar blocks and ideological
polarization of the Cold War.
In this period, Turkey’s establishment of
relations with China also affected the academic
world. In this context, opinions began to emerge
about the need for Turkey to recognize China.
One of them is Fahir Armaoğlu’s comment
published on 11 September 1964. Armaoğlu
stated that he believes Turkey’s recognition will
have significant results for both Ankara, and
stated that such recognition would have some
important consequences for Beijing, especially
in its conflict with Moscow, its struggle with
Washington, and its relations with the newly
independent states of Asia and Africa (Armaoglu,
1964: 2).
In addition, Armaoğlu stated that as a result of
this recognition, Turkey would take part in Asian
politics, develop its relations with the newly-
independent African countries and also have
the opportunity to develop relations with some
countries within the Soviet Bloc, as well as some
Latin American countries. However, Armaoğlu
also voiced a caution: “An important factor that
Turkey should consider in recognizing Beijing
is the development of relations between Turkey
and Japan. For Turkey, this [relations with Japan]
is necessary both economically and politically.”
Former Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Zhou Enlai. (CGTN, 2017)
59
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
(Armaoğlu, 1964: 2). In fact, Armaoğlu advocated
for the further development of relations with
Japan in order to counter-balance China. In other
words, there still remained a feeling of distrust
towards China in the background. In terms of the
stereotyped threats of the Cold War era, this is
not surprising. Still, in his assessment, Armaoğlu
sees Pakistan, Japan and China as the main
pillars of Turkey’s foreign policy towards Asia
(Armaoğlu, 1964: 2).
Statements by Chinese Foreign Minister
Chen Yi on Turkey
Exactly one year after Zhou Enlai’s statement,
on March 21, 1965, Foreign Minister Hasan
Işık’s statement that Turkey desires to achieve
better relations with China gave a new impetus
to rapprochement efforts between the two
countries (Chronology March-May-1965,
1965:199). After this statement by Foreign
Minister Işık, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s
Republic of China, Marshal Chen Yi, who was
visiting Pakistan, delivered a speech to Turkish
journalists. President Eyüp Khan of Pakistan
and Foreign Minister Zülfikar Ali Bhutto stated
that they wanted to act as a mediator for the
recognition of the People’s Republic of China by
Turkey, just like Pakistan, and that the response
of the Turkish Government was still expected
(Acar, 1965: 1).
In addition, Chen Yi stated that he first
told the Turkish Ambassador during his visit
to Afghanistan in 1960 that China wanted to
normalize its relations with Turkey and that
China had a positive opinion on this issue. He
stated that it is the natural role of the Turkish
Government to determine what needs to be
done for this, and that Turkey is a country
whose past is rooted in Asia. He went to say that
China is an ancient Asian nation, and therefore
they are waiting for the decision of Turkey with
interest (Acar, 1965:1). In addition, Chen Yi
emphasized that Turkey has difficulties in its
relations with the great powers and China is
also suffering from this situation; therefore, it
is necessary for the two countries to cooperate,
saying, “They should live in friendship. There
is no disagreement, no conflict of interest
between them. No harm has touched Turkey.
We have not seen any harm from Turkey. I hope
that a solution can be found to normalize our
relations.” (Acar, 1965: 1).
In the 1960s, it had become a custom for the
Chinese to refer to the Cyprus problem in almost
any statement about Turkey. However, it should
be noted that all Chinese officials have adopted
a routine, diplomatic and neutral stance on the
Cyprus issue in a specific pattern. In his speech
to Turkish journalists, Chen Yi expressed his
belief that the principle of the federal state
would not resolve the Cyprus conflict unless
the principles of equality of nations and mutual
respect are respected in addressing the Cyprus
issue (Acar, 1965:1). Meanwhile, the Beijing
administration responded positively to the
World Red Cross Organization’s call for help to
the Turkish Cypriots and provided 70 thousand
liras in aid. Instead of sending the money to the
Red Cross account in Switzerland, China sent
the money directly to Turkey. He made a gesture
against Turkey by sending it to the Turkish Red
Crescent via the Central Bank (Cumhuriyet,
March 28, 1965:1).
Despite the positive statements of the People’s
Republic of China and Turkey regarding the
establishment of relations between the two
countries, some parliamentarians also visited
Chinese Taiwan and made important statements
there. One of them was Lebit Yurdoğlu, the
former Minister of Rural Affairs. In July 1965,
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
60
he made an 11-day visit to Chinese Taiwan,
where he was received by the country’s prime
minister. In his statement at the airport in
Chinese Taiwan’s capital Taipei, Yurdoğlu said
that 90 percent of the Turkish people are hostile
to communism (Cumhuriyet, July 8, 1965:3).
Senator Sami Küçük gave a speech in the
Parliamentary Senate of the Republic during
the 1965 Budget negotiations. During the visit
of the President of the Senate of the Republic
Enver Aka to Pakistan in November 1964, the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan told him
that China supported Turkey’s Cyprus cause
and that the Soviet Union also supported this
case. He said that China also made an attempt
to support his position. Therefore, Sami Küçük
pointed out that the People’s Republic of China,
which wanted to stand by Turkey in this just
cause, should be recognized as a balancing
factor in Turkey’s foreign policy, as Pakistan had
done (Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi,
February 1, 1965:1023).
Within the framework of all these
developments, efforts were undertaken to
prepare a trade agreement between Turkey
and China in November 1965. To establish
commercial relationships between the two
countries, the Turkish representative of the
Leipzig Fair, Şadi Atagöksel, was invited to
China by the Beijing Export Development
Center, and said on his return that “A new and
large marketplace has been opened to Turkey”
(Cumhuriyet, November 26, 1965: 5). On
December 6, 1966, this time a trade delegation
from China came to Izmir and met with
Turkish businessmen at the Izmir Chamber
of Commerce. Hsiao Fang Chou, head of the
Chinese trade delegation and vice-chairman
of the International Trade Promotion Council,
said in a statement; “This is the first time we are
going on such a trip. Today, China is on the way
to develop its foreign trade. We are facing many
challenges in the development of our foreign
trade. The difficulties come from countries
that claim to be so-called socialists rather
than imperialist countries. In this context, we
want to do business under equal conditions.
Developing relations will be very beneficial
for both countries” (Cumhuriyet, December 7,
1966: 7).
As it is understood from the statements in
the 1960s, both countries used careful language
in order not to alienate each other and tried to
approach each other through common issues
rather than political and ideological differences.
Within the scope of the Third World policy,
China’s support for the Palestinians in the
Arab-Israeli conflict and its refusal to recognize
imperialist Israeli Zionism attracted attention in
Turkey. This was especially as China considers
bilateral relations within the scope of the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, which is the
basis of its foreign policy. The fact that Chinese
Taiwan, which represents China in the UN
Security Council, did not stand by Turkey’s side
in some issues such as Cyprus at the UN, and
that the USA followed suit, was also effective in
As it is understood from the
statements in the 1960s, both
countries used careful language
in order not to alienate each other
and tried to approach each other
through common issues rather
than political and ideological
differences.
61
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
Turkey bringing the China card to the table. In
addition, China’s successful participation in the
nuclear club in 1964 by carrying out the atomic
bomb test also increased China’s position vis-à-
vis Turkey.
Sino-Turkish Relations in the 1970s
By the 1970s, the issue of China’s representation
in the UN had long exceeded a dimension that
could no longer be ignored. Since 1950, the
problem of China’s representation in the UN
had always been the main agenda item for the
UN and international politics. China’s first
serious attempt for UN membership was in 1960.
However, the USA started to stall the process by
arguing that the representation problem was an
important one and should be negotiated.
While the USA argued that Chinese Taiwan
should represent the Chinese society, many
countries also sided with the People’s Republic of
China. However, Turkey, following the path of the
USA, voted against China’s membership to the
UN and caused criticism from various quarters.
Cumhuriyet newspaper’s lead writer, Nadir Nadi,
criticized Turkey’s follow-up to the United States
on China in his column in the newspaper:
In terms of international relations, it is
obvious that the situation is far from serious.
As a matter of fact, some NATO member
states, especially England and France, have
officially recognized the People’s Republic of
China, and these states have re-established
their relations. As for our stance, the fact that
we are following a policy that has made it a
principle not to stray from the yoke of the
USA for a moment has been conspicuous once
again. As a result of the pressure of the events,
America will eventually officially recognize
the People’s Republic of China, do we have to
walk behind it? (Nadi, 1970:1)
Haluk Bayülken, Turkey’s permanent
representative at the UN, explained the reason
for Turkey’s game against China in the UN as
follows:
Keeping the principles and objectives
of the UN law and the development of the
United Nations in constant consideration, we
followed this meeting with full attention and
listened to various views with great interest
and contemplation. On this occasion, I would
like to express once again the commitment
of my government to the principle of
universality. This view has been expressed
many times from this podium. Indeed, from
its inception we have recognized the United
Nations Organization as a world organization
in which all nations, within the understanding
of the law, can achieve their rightful place
in the community, regardless of their size or
their political, social and economic beliefs.
We have always been driven by the desire to
make this belief a viable reality. I would like
to add that we are still willing to act in this
direction today. However, unfortunately,
since the draft resolution in document no. a
/ 1.605 does not fully meet these stipulated
issues, it is not considered possible to be
approved. Therefore, we must cast our vote
against this proposal. My government stands
ready to carefully consider any proposal for
the representation of the People’s Republic
of China at the United Nations. (The draft
resolution in the aforementioned document
recommends the expulsion of the Nationalist
Chinese Government from the United Nations
with the acceptance of the representatives
of Mainland China) (Dışişleri Bakanlığı
Belleteni, 1970:72).
62
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
Meanwhile, the United States had also
started to make attempts to improve relations
with China since 1969, and a few attempts by
the Nixon administration failed. Despite this,
in 1970, Nixon instructed his then national
security adviser, Henry Kissinger, to prioritize
relationships with China. Nixon had already
begun to express at every opportunity that
they could no longer ignore the increasing
importance of China.
The issue of the recognition of China had
now become the number one topic of foreign
policy agenda in the Grand National Assembly
of Turkey. While the budget of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs was discussed in the 1971 Budget
negotiations, the discussions in the context
of China focused on two main topics: firstly,
why Turkey did not vote positively in China’s
membership process to the UN and secondly,
China should be recognized as soon as possible.
Salih Tanyeri, speaking on behalf of the CHP
group in the meetings pointed out that China’s
entry into the United Nations was no longer
a matter of time; he said that the need of the
United Nations for China outweighed China’s
needs for the UN. After all, China had 800
million people and nuclear power. In addition,
Salih Tanyeri states that “Turkey’s attitude and
vote towards China, although they recognize
Britain, Italy, France, Canada, the Netherlands,
Denmark and Norway from the states included
in NATO, is in line with the attitude and vote
of the United States.” (Cumhuriyet Senatosu
Tutanak Dergisi,1971:347).
US President Nixon shakes hands with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai on his visit to China, February 21-28, 1972. (Shou, 2020)
63
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
Speaking on behalf of the National Unity
group, Ahmet Yıldız, on the other hand, said,
“We cannot find any rational aspect to our policy
regarding China, with which we have had no bad
relations in the past,” and then Yıldız directed a
number of questions to the government:
Why did we oppose the recognition of this
giant country at the United Nations, which
NATO members Italy and Canada want to
recognize, England and France maintain
advanced relations with, and even the United
States has indirect talks and affirmed it
will recognize conditionally? Even though
recognizing China is not considered contrary
to NATO membership, we find the hostility
we stubbornly maintain to be very strange.
Is there a reason we do not know about the
unrealistic policy pursued by the Government
against China, with which we can establish
beneficial political and economic relations?
Is there any intention to change this wrong
policy? We would like to learn. (Cumhuriyet
Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi, 1971:359)
Kasım Gülek (Senator of CHP) also
emphasized that China is a state that was about
to become a superpower, referring to the policy
of China’s increasing influence in the Middle
East and Africa, and continued: “We have
been saying for years, it is time for Turkey to
recognize Continental China. We believe that
with the Canadian formula, it is possible for
Chinese Taiwan to remain in the United Nations
and for the Mainland China to be recognized.”
(Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi,
1971:373). Kasım Gülek made the following
observations on China’s attitude towards the
Cyprus issue: “It would have been necessary
to make this recognition a few years ago, when
MainlandChinasaidthat“federationgivesbirth”
to Cyprus. At that time, Mainland China was in
great need of these recognitions. We have missed
the full point of this; it would be appropriate not
to miss it even more.” (Cumhuriyet Senatosu
Tutanak Dergisi, 1971:374).
After all these speeches, Minister of Foreign
Affairs İhsan Sabri Çağlayangil came to the
podium and explained the foreign policy of his
government, and in this context, he mentioned
the most important agenda of the day: the China
issue. Çağlayangil, like other speakers, said that
with its 800 million population, China had
now become a reality in international politics
and a factor that should be taken into account
without wasting any time, adding that the
People’s Republic of China was gaining weight
and making its presence felt day by day due to
its population and potential. On the other hand,
he emphasized that Turkey’s realistic attitude
towards Mainland China should be evaluated
in the light of the international conjuncture
and the basic principles that every state, big
and small, justifies its representation at the
UN (Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi,
1971:383).
After these discussions took place in the
Turkish Grand National Assembly, Chinese
Taiwan (Republic of China) hastily sent its
deputy foreign minister to Ankara. On February
25, 1971, the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
held meetings with Orhan Eralp, the Secretary
General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and
focused on Turkey’s future relations with the
Republic of China. He also delivered the message
sent by Taiwan President Chiang Kai-shek to
President Sunay and the Secretary General
Eralp, calling for the further development of
Taiwan’s bilateral relations with Turkey in all
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
64
fields, especially in trade and culture. During
these meetings, Taiwan’s deputy foreign minister
insisted Foreign Minister Çağlayangil to visit
Chinese Taiwan (Cumhuriyet, 26 Şubat 1971: 1).
By March, important developments were
observed in Turkey’s domestic politics. Prime
Minister Süleyman Demirel resigned from the
government as a result of the memorandum
given by the Turkish Armed Forces to the
Demirel government on March 12, 1971.
Osman Olcay, one of the senior diplomats of
the ministry, was brought to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs. On March 26, 1971, Prime
Minister Nihat Erim, under the foreign policy
title of his government’s program, made a
statement regarding China, “We are seriously
examining the problem of establishing political
and economic relations with Mainland China,
on which our public has recently focused, in
terms of whether it is in line with our national
interests.” (Neziroğlu and Yılmaz, 2013: 3280).
For the first time, a statement about establishing
relations with the People’s Republic of China
was included in a government program.
Exactly one month after the new government
mentioned the establishment of relations with
China in its program, Foreign Minister Olcay
announced to the public that direct contacts had
begun between Turkey and the People’s Republic
of China with the aim of establishing diplomatic
relations (Cumhuriyet, April 26, 1971:1).
During this period, both China and Turkey
maintained confidentiality on the subject
of establishing relations, because there
was the danger of preventing or delaying
the establishment of new relations due to
ongoing rivalries in the Cold War climate. The
government of the People’s Republic announced
that they agreed to start negotiations for the
establishment of diplomatic relations with
Turkey and both countries appointed their
ambassadors in France to carry out these
negotiations (Cumhuriyet, May 9, 1971:1).
Turkey Establishes Contact with China
InthefirstdaysofAugust1971,itwasannounced
that Turkey would recognize China in a few
days. It was understood that the parties reached
an agreement on diplomatic recognition in July
and working on a confirmation date. At that
time, according to the leaked news from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the announcement
was firstly set for the end of July, but this date
was postponed for various reasons such as the
Taiwan’s ambassador departure from Turkey.
In addition, Turkey’s ambassador to Chinese
Taiwan was instructed to start preparations
for his return to Turkey (Cumhuriyet, August
3, 1971:7). Meanwhile, at a secret meeting of
the Foreign Affairs Committee of the National
Assembly on August 2, Foreign Minister Olcay
shared information on the ongoing efforts
to establish diplomatic relations with China
(Cumhuriyet, August 3, 1971:7).
ChinaandTurkeymaintained
confidentialityonthesubjectof
establishingrelations,becausethere
wasthedangerofpreventingor
delayingtheestablishmentofnew
relationsduetoongoingrivalriesin
theColdWarclimate.
65
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
Turkey’s Recognition of the People’s
Republic of China
Turkey and China came together in Paris
to conclude the establishment of diplomatic
relations that they had been negotiating for a
long time. On June 4, Turkey’s Ambassador to
Paris Hasan Esat Işık and China’s Ambassador
to Paris Huang Chen announced the following
statement to the public.
Declaration on the establishment of diplomatic
relations between the People’s Republic of
China and the Republic of Turkey
The Governments of the People’s Republic of
China and the Republic of Turkey have decided
to establish diplomatic relations on the basis of
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity,
non-interference in internal affairs, respect for the
principles of equality of rights and reciprocity of
interests.
The Turkish Government recognizes that the
Government of the People’s Republic of China is
the only legal Government of China. The Chinese
and Turkish Governments decided to exchange
ambassadors as soon as the administrative
formalities and practical arrangements were
completed and agreed to provide each other with
all necessary assistance for the establishment of
diplomatic missions in their respective capitals
and to facilitate their fulfillment of their duties
in accordance with international principles and
practices.
Hasan Esat Işık Huang Chen
(Joint Communique on the Establishment of
diplomatic relations Between the People’s Republic
of China and the republic of Turkey, 1971:6)
Following Turkey’s official recognition, the
following congratulatory article was published
as an editorial in the People’s Daily (Renmin
Ribao) in China on 7 August:
After the Government of the People’s
Republic of China and the Republic of Turkey
announced on August 5 that diplomatic
relations were established at the embassy level
on the basis of independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity, non-interference in
internal affairs, reciprocity of interests,
and respect for the principles of rights and
equality, we offer our sincere congratulations
on this issue.
There is a long tradition of friendship
between the Chinese and Turkish peoples.
The friendly relations of our two peoples go
back to ancient times. The historically famous
“silk road” stretches from China’s Gansu and
Xinjiang via Afghanistan, Iran and Central
Asia to Turkey. Friendly relations between
China and Turkey were interrupted only by
the obstacles of imperialism and colonialism.
The declaration that China and Turkey have
now established diplomatic relations is in
full harmony with the common aspirations
of the two peoples and the common interests
of the two sides. The Turkish people have a
glorious tradition of revolutionary struggle.
The Chinese and Turkish peoples, who were
once subjected to imperialist attacks and
oppression, have always sympathized and
supported each other in the joint struggle
against imperialism. We strongly support the
Turkish people in their struggle to protect
national independence and defend state
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The government of the People’s Republic
of China is the only legal government
representing the entire Chinese people, and
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
66
Taiwan Province is an integral part of China’s
holy land. Whether “two Chinas”, “one China,
one Taiwan” or “Taiwan independence” or
“Taiwan’s status to be determined”, any plan
aimed at separating Taiwan from China will
certainly fail. Chairman Mao, the great leader
of the Chinese people, said, “We should strive
to establish normal diplomatic relations with
all countries that wish to live in peace with us,
based on territorial integrity and sovereignty
and equality and mutual respect for mutual
benefit.”
The Chinese Government firmly advocates
that all countries, regardless of their size and
different social systems, should be equal and
live in peace. We have constantly sought to
establish and develop friendly relations with
all countries on the basis of equality and
mutual benefit, and mutual respect for their
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
current agreement on the establishment of
diplomatic relations between the governments
of China and Turkey is the result of the joint
efforts of the two sides. The establishment
of diplomatic relations between China and
Turkey opened wide horizons for friendship
and cooperation between the two countries.
We firmly believe that the friendship between
the Chinese and Turkish peoples will definitely
grow day by day.
Renmin Ribao, 7 Ağustos 1971
(Greeting the Establishment of Diplomatic
Relations Between China and Turkey,
1971:6,11).
Turkey’s initiation of a new era with China
aroused satisfaction in Turkey, although not as
much as in China, and it was reported as news
on the front pages of the newspapers. Haluk
Sayınsoy, General Director of Foreign Affairs
and Administrative Affairs, explained the task of
establishing relations with China, and announced
to the Turkish public that the relationship would
be established at the press conference on 5
August. In addition, Sayınsoy stated at this press
conference that there would be an exchange of
ambassadors between the two countries in 1972
(Cumhuriyet, August 6, 1972:7).
The first support from politicians came from
Kasım Gülek in the Senate of the Republic.
Gülek said that it was a good move for Turkey
to recognize China, and that all Turkey’s friends
recognized China, so Turkey had to recognize it as
well, adding that “We have peaceful relations with
many countries whose regimes we do not adopt,
it is even late to recognize China.” (Cumhuriyet
Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi, 1971:461). In addition,
Gülek made a statement supporting China and
Turkey in the most difficult period of the Cyprus
problem, declaring his stance. At that time, he
stated that maybe it would be more advantageous
for us to know China, and the government’s
direction was correct. (Cumhuriyet Senatosu
Tutanak Dergisi, 1971:461).
With Turkey’s recognition of China, one of the
first reactions that appeared in the public was the
claim that this diplomatic step was made under
the influence of the USA. aid Koçaş, Deputy
Prime Minister, responded to these allegations
on 6 August at the Grand National Assembly
of Turkey, saying, “This decision was taken
exclusively by considering the interests of Turkey.
Our decision has not been influenced or even
suggested by any foreign state.” (Cumhuriyet,
August 7, 1971:1). In his speech, Koçaş said the
following about the recognition of China:
We have not had diplomatic relations with
67
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
the People’s Republic of China, which is the
largest state in the world with a population
of 750 million. Our government, which
mainly dealt with these investigations and
made a situation judgment, was decided and
the case was announced to the whole world’s
public opinion. This decision has been taken
exclusively by considering Turkey’s interstate
interests. No foreign state influence in our
decision; In fact, there was no suggestion, the
events quickly showed that our country took
this decision just in time, and some other
countries took action after we started the
negotiations (Cumhuriyet, August 7, 1971:7).
In his speech at the National Assembly, Deputy
Prime Minister Koçaş also touched upon the
situation and future of Taiwan, which was another
issue that emerged with the recognition of China
and received much criticism. He said that Turkey
would not be a supporter of secession, but as a
natural result of our relations, Turkey would support
the membership of the People’s Republic of China to
the United Nations.
Noting that the Taiwanese Embassy would leave
our country after the beginning of diplomatic
relations with the People’s Republic of China, and
that China would establish an embassy of 15 people
in Turkey in accordance with the agreement, Koçaş
later said:
All transactions will take place in mutually
equal rights. While presenting this issue to
your supreme delegation and our noble nation,
I would like to specifically state that regardless
of their regimes, both sides will never interfere
in each other’s internal affairs, but that it will be
natural for our economic relations to develop
rapidly along with diplomatic relations. While
Ipresentthisdecision,whichistheproductofa
unifying and constructive thought on all kinds
of domestic policy problems, to be welcomed
by all parties and esteemed members, as a new
manifestation of the unity and solidarity that
our nation has shown throughout history in
foreign policy, I wish that it will be beneficial
for our nation, our country and world peace
(Cumhuriyet, August 7, 1971:7.).
Meanwhile, the Foreign Affairs Committee
of the Senate of the Republic held a special
meeting on the recognition of the People’s
Republic of China, upon the request of Fethi
Tevetoğlu, senator of the Adalet Party and
member of the Foreign Affairs Committee. In
this secret meeting, Sadi Koçaş, Deputy Prime
Minister for Political Affairs, and the officials
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs explained
the purpose and reasons for the decision taken
by the government on the recognition of the
People’s Republic of China (Cumhuriyet, August
7, 1971:7). As a continuation of this process
in the Grand National Assembly of Turkey,
the government also informed political party
leaders about the issue. Prime Minister Nihat
Erim also met with the leaders of the parties
in the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and
gave information about the relations established
with China. In this context, Prime Minister
Erim met with Turhan Feyzioğlu, Chairman
of the National Trust Party, and Ferruh
Bozbeyli, Chairman of the Democrat Party, at
the Parliament on August 9, and evaluated his
meeting with the Prime Minister from Bozbey
as follows:
We had discussions about the recognition
of the People’s Republic of China, which is
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
68
today’s issue. As you know, the work of the
old and new governments has finally come
to a conclusion… The positive results of this
decision for our country, especially in terms
of our economic relations and defense policy,
should be clearly revealed. I am not convinced
that the efforts are sufficient to ensure the
continuation of our close relations with
nationalist China (Cumhuriyet, August 10,
1971:7).
The main reaction against the recognition
of China came from the Adalet Party. Adalet
Party Chairman Süleyman Demirel severely
criticized the recognition of China and
turning its back on Taiwan in his statement to
the press on 8 August. In his speech, Demirel
stated:
The recognition of Red China by Turkey
takes place in our press and radios as the
topic of the day. It is said that Red China is
a world-class power, recognized by many
countries as the reason for the recognition.
It is also claimed that establishing relations
with Red China will bring many benefits to
our country. In other words, it is stated that
the interests of the country are taken into
consideration without this recognition. The
issue of which interests of Turkey are taken
into consideration by recognizing China
and what Turkey will gain by embarking
on such a path is not clearly expressed; it
is even being avoided. If everyone knew
Red China! … If those in charge claim that
recognizing Red China is in the interests
of the country, they also have to explain
Meeting where the People’s Republic of China was officially recognized at the United Nations. (United Press International, 1971)
69
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
to the public what these interests are. In
my opinion, in today’s environment and
at this time, recognizing Red China is not
beneficial for Turkey. You didn’t recognize
them for 23 years, but what damage have
we received? While Turkey has so many
issues, it is surprising that recognizing Red
China is presented to the Turkish public as
a very important achievement. Turkey does
not currently have any crops to sell to Red
China, nor does it have anything to buy from
Red China. In this respect, it is not possible
to claim that there will be great benefits in
terms of economic relations (Cumhuriyet,
August 9, 1971:7).
Demirel made the following assessment
regarding the status and future of Turkey’s
relations with Taiwan:
In recognition of Red China, it is
regrettable that the condition of severing
relations with Nationalist China (Taiwan),
which had fought for nearly 25 years
against the communist spread in Southeast
Asia, was accepted. Those in charge, while
recognizing Red China, should explain
to the Turkish public to what extent they
accept the conditions put forward by Red
China, what conditions are put forward by
us and to what extent the other party accepts
them. Thus, the public will have an opinion
on whether Turkey’s interests are protected
or not. In summary, hastily recognizing
Red China will not benefit Turkey. I also
declare that we regret the discontinuation
of our relations with the nationalist China,
which is an anti-communist country with
friendly feelings (Cumhuriyet, August 9,
1971:7).
Deputy Prime Minister Sadi Koçaş
responded to the harsh criticisms of the
Adalet Party and its Chairman Demirel on
Turkey’s recognition of China with an off-
the-topic speech in the National Assembly. In
his talk, he criticized the statement of Adalet
Party leader Süleyman Demirel opposing
the recognition of the People’s Republic of
China and explained with documents that
attempts to establish relations with Mainland
China started during the Adalet Party’s rule.
Deputy Prime Minister Koçaş said, “Mr.
Demirel, under his presidency, cannot have
forgotten the answers given by the relevant
and authorized authorities in the Senate and
the National Assembly, in the commissions
of a government that has responsibility for
nearly six years, and also the answers he gave
to a written question. For reasons we cannot
understand, he has abandoned his old view.”
(Cumhuriyet, August 10, 1971:7). On the
other hand, Koçaş stated that they accepted
Demirel’s statement as a personal statement
of the government, and said, “We understand
the most obvious characteristic of being a
government as continuity in words and actions
unless there are major changes.” (Cumhuriyet,
August 10, 1971:7).
In the continuation of his speech, Koçaş
presentedtheviewsoftheAdaletPartyonChina
by giving examples from the recent past, and
cited the 1971 statements of Foreign Minister
Çağlayangil of the Adalet Party government
regarding the recognition of China. Most
importantly, on February 20, 1971, Deputy
Chairman of Foreign Affairs, Hasan Dinçer,
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
70
said in his speech at the National Assembly
that the People’s Republic of China with its
800 million population is an indisputable
fact, and that efforts would be made for both
their recognition and their membership to
the United Nations (Cumhuriyet, August 10,
1971:7).
Süleyman Demirel, the leader of the Adalet
Party, who had not taken the rostrum since
the day he left the Prime Ministry with the
12 March memorandum, responded from the
rostrum of the Parliament on the allegations
of Koçaş regarding the recognition of China.
Demirel pointed out that governments should
explain their policy decisions with their own
justifications. Concluding his speech, Demirel
stated that for the same reason, Turkey may as
well request the recognition of North Korea
(Cumhuriyet, August 10, 1971:7).
Speaking on behalf of the CHP group,
the group’s vice chairman, Necdet Uğur,
criticized Demirel’s words and said, “Wouldn’t
it be necessary for someone who has been
responsible for the government of the
Republic of Turkey for 5 years to rise above
such an important foreign policy issue?
Demirel says national interests are not an
enigma, and the government should explain it.
448 people have the right to say such a word;
two people do not. One is Demirel and the
other is Çağlayangil. Does Demirel not know
about Mainland China, the American-Russian
relations, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
(SALT)? If he doesn’t know, it’s a shame for
this country. How can Demirel, who served as
the Prime Minister for 5 years, not know this?”
(Cumhuriyet, August 10, 1971:7).
Deputy Prime Minister Koçaş, who came
back to the podium to respond to the criticisms
on behalf of the government, stated that
they were always ready to answer Demirel’s
questions in a secret session, and that the
Adalet Party government had also initiatives
for the recognition of the People’s Republic of
China (Cumhuriyet, August 10, 1971:7).
Eventually, Liu Chun, who was appointed as
theAnkaraAmbassadorofthePeople’sRepublic
of China on May 26, 1972, approximately 10
months after Turkey’s recognition of China,
started his duty by presenting his letter of
credence to President Cevdet Sunay. Before
being appointed as ambassador to Turkey,
Liu Chun had served as the Asian Affairs Desk
Manager at the Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. In August, Nuri Eren, Turkey’s senior
diplomat at the United Nations representation,
was appointed as Turkey’s Ambassador to
Beijing. Nuri Eren started his duty in Beijing
on October 31, 1972.
Review and Discussion
Turkey’s establishment of diplomatic relati-
ons with China is a by-product of Turkey’s
changing foreign policy. Although the period
Eventually, Liu Chun was
appointed as the Ankara
Ambassador of the People’s
Republic of China on May 26, 1972.
71
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
between 1950 and 1960 was a period in which
Turkish foreign policy was on the axis of the
West, and particularly that of the United Sta-
tes, the period of 1960-1980 is called a peri-
od of relative autonomy, according to writers
such as Mehmet Gonlübol (1996) and Baskın
Oran (2001). Indeed, when we look at foreign
policy developments of this period, it is seen
that Turkey had started to follow its own nati-
onal interests rather than following a bloc po-
licy. The most important foreign policy prob-
lem of this period was disagreements with the
USA, especially due to the Cyprus problem.
This difference of opinion led Turkey to re-
vise its policy of balance, a traditional fore-
ign policy strategy. Therefore, relations with
the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet
Union were reviewed.
Since the 1960s, the increasing influence
of China in international politics, which att-
racted attention all over the world, had also
shown its effect in Turkey so that the estab-
lishment of relations with China had come to
the agenda. China had become a controver-
sial issue in the press, politics and academic
world in Turkey. Although in the 1960s, as a
reaction to the US attitude towards Cyprus,
especially in 1964, Turkey was warned aga-
inst the Cyprus issue in a harsh way and the
political figures of the period brought up the
recognition of China as a response to the th-
reatening Johnson Letter, this could not go
beyond being a weak bluff against the USA.
Despite this, the issue of recognizing China
was on Turkey’s agenda. However, this issue
remained bound to the Turkish-American
relations, and their position over the Cyprus
issue. Undoubtedly, this problem did not ari-
se as a one-sided request. In the 1960s, posi-
tive messages came from China as well. The
statements made by Chinese Premier Zhou
Enlai and Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister
Chen Yi showed that the Beijing administ-
ration was also willing to establish relations
with Turkey.
The issue of recognizing China had also
been a domestic policy issue and discussion
in Turkey. In particular, one dimension of
the political fight between the Adalet Party,
which had to leave power as a result of the
military memorandum in 1971, and the Erim
government that replaced it, was the issue of
recognizing China. Members of the Adalet
Party carried out their criticism against the
Erim government, both in the press and in
their speeches in Parliament, regarding the
recognition of China. On the other hand,
the Erim government argued that the Adalet
Party started the process of recognizing Chi-
na and would eventully complete it.
The most important point of the discussi-
ons in the process of the recognition of China
was the accusations that Turkey was following
the path of the USA’s stance with China, espe-
Since the 1960s, the increasing
influence of China in international
politics, which attracted attention
all over the world, had also shown
its effect in Turkey so that the
B R I q • Volume 3 Issue 1 Winter 2021-2022
72
cially in the UN. Both the Adalet Party and
the Erim government faced such accusations.
Turkey’s stance with the USA in voting on
China’s membership in the UN further incre-
ased the reactions against the USA in the Tur-
kish public opinion.
A number of technical issues also arose
throughout the process of Turkey’s recogni-
tion of China. In particular, the situation of
Chinese Taiwan, which represented China at
the UN, had been the subject of much debate.
Turkey’s thesis from the very beginning was
that both Chinas should stay in the UN, whi-
ch in this respect was already the thesis of the
USA. However, China opposed the inclusion
of Chinese Taiwan in the UN, citing the “one
China principle”. China stated that the count-
ries that would establish diplomatic relations
with him should also comply with this one-C-
hina principle, otherwise, China would not
establish diplomatic relations. Another issue
was the discussion about Turkey discontinu-
ing its good relations with Taiwan, which had
lasted for years, which would be against the
principle of Pacta Sunt Servanda, that is, the
principle of pact and fidelity, and that there
should be an intermediate formula for this.
Particularly, the Adalet Party made great ef-
forts in this regard. On the other hand, Chine-
se Taiwan did not provide support in the UN
Security Council on important issues of Tur-
key. For example, Chinese Taiwan gave almost
no support for Cyprus. Taiwan is a country
that has completely followed the helm of the
USA. However, China’s assessments of the
Cyprus problem since the 1960s are closer
to Turkey’s theses and Turkey has interpre-
ted this as a supportive gesture. In addition,
the fact that China, unlike Chinese Taiwan,
would have its own agenda at the UN, meant
that an alternative friend and supporter for
Turkey would be in the UN Security Council
in the future.
In the shadow of all these discussions, Tur-
key recognized the People’s Republic of China
on August 4, 1971. In 1972, the embassies of
both countries were opened and ambassadors
were appointed. Since that day, the relations
between the two ancient peoples of Asia have
continued to develop for 50 years. Although
17 years of these relations occurred the inf-
luence of the Cold War climate, official presi-
dential visits were made to China for the first
time in the 1980s, and more visits were made
from China to Turkey. In the 1970s, Süleyman
Demirel, who was vehemently opposed to the
recognition of China, gave the Order of Merit
to the Chinese President Jiang Zemin in An-
kara in 2000, exactly 30 years later, guided by
his own motto that “yesterday is yesterday, to-
day is today” once again.
References
Acar, Ö. (1965, March 28). Pekin Çin’i Tanımamızı İstedi.
Cumhuriyet.
Adıbelli, B. (2016). Osmanlı’dan günümüze Türk-Çin ilişkileri
(2. edition). İstanbul: IQ Yayıncılık.
Armaoğlu, F. (1964, September 14). Türkiye ve Uzakdoğu.
Cumhuriyet.
Bağcı, H. (1990). Demokrat parti dönemi dış politikası.
Ankara: İmge.
Bölükbaşı, S. (2001). Barışçı çözümsüzlük. Ankara: İmge.
73
Barış Adıbelli - The Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Turkey and the People’s Republic of China (1960-1971)
Chronology March-May 1965. (1965). Pakistan Horizon,
18(2), 195–210. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/
stable/41392850
Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi, (1965, February 1).
TBMM, Dönem,I, Cilt.24, Toplantı.4, 36.Birleşim, 927-
1071.
Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi, (1971, August 4).
TBMM, Cilt.66, Toplantı.10, 97.Birleşim. 419-457.
Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi, (1971, August 5).
TBMM, Cilt.66, Toplantı.10, 98.Birleşim. 459-499.
Cumhuriyet Senatosu Tutanak Dergisi, (1971, February 3).
TBMM, Dönem,I, Cilt.63-1, Toplantı.10, 36.Birleşim,
345-499.
Cumhuriyet. (1960, April 12). Menderes Moskova’ya Gidecek,
Hrutçef de Ankara’yı ziyaret edecek, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1964, October 31). Erkin’i Moskova
Havaalanında Gromiko Karşıladı, s.1 .
Cumhuriyet. (1965, July 8). Yurdoğlu Çin Başbakanı ile
Görüştü, s.3.
Cumhuriyet. (1965, March 28). 70.000 Lira Yardım, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1965, November 26). Çin Halk Cumhuriyeti ile
bir Ticaret Anlaşması yapılacak, s.5.
Cumhuriyet. (1966, December 7). Kızıl Çin heyeti Sosyalist
ülkelerle ticaretten yakındı, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, April 26). Çin’le temasa geçildi, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, August 10). Erim, Feyzioğlu ve Bozbeyli
ile İç ve Dış Meseleleri Görüştü, s.7.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, August 10). Koçaş ile Demirel Çin
konusunda tartıştı, s.7
Cumhuriyet. (1971, August 3). Türkiye Çin Halk
Cumhuriyeti’ni Tanıdığını Bir İki Güne Açıklayacak, s.7.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, August 6). Çin’i tanırken, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, August 7). Çin ile ilgili kararımız, dış
tesir olmadan alındı, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, August 9). Demirel Kıta Çini’nin
Tanınmasını Kınadı, s.7.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, February 26). Çan Kay Şek, Sunay’a
Mesaj Gönderdi, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1971, May 9). Kıta Çin’iyle temasa geçildiği
açıklandı, s.1.
Cumhuriyet. (1972, August 6). Çin’i Tanıdık, s.7.
Dışişleri Bakanlığı Belleteni. (1970, January). Belgeler.
Ankara: Dışişleri Bakanlığı Yayınları.
Gönlübol, M. (1996). Olaylarla Türk Dış Politikası (9.
edition). Ankara: Siyasal Kitabevi.
Greeting the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between
China and Turkey. (1971, August 13). Peking Review,
33(13), 6-11.
Hale, W. (2003). Türk Dış Politikası 1774-2000 (trans.Petek
Denir). İstanbul: Mozaik.
Hillam, R. C. (1966, Winter). Key Issues in the Development
of the Sino-Soviet Dispute. Brigham Young University
Studies, 7(2), 95-102.
Johnson, L.B. & İnönü, İ. (1966, Summer). President Johnson
and Prime Minister Inonu: Correspondence between
President Johnson and Prime Minister Inonu, June 1964.
Middle East Journal, 20(3), 386-393.
Joint Communique on the Establishment of Diplomatic
Relations Between the People’s Republic of China and the
Republic of Turkey. (13 August 1971). Peking Review,
(33), 6-11.
Nadi, N. (1970, November 22). Neden Hep Arkadan?
Cumhuriyet.
Neziroğlu, İ. & Yılmaz, T. (Ed.). (2013, October). Hükümetler,
Programları ve Genel Kurul Görüşmeleri. Ankara: TBMM
Basımevi.
Oran, B. (2001). Türk Dış Politikası (1. edition). İstanbul:
İletişim Yayınları.
Robinson, T. W. (1972). The Sino-Soviet Border Dispute:
Background, Development, and the March 1969 Clashes.
American Political Science Review, 66(4), 1175–1202.
Statement by Zhou Enlai to Akşam. (1964). Dışişleri
Bakanlığı Belleteni, Temmuz.
Tellal, E. (2000). SSCB-Türkiye İlişkileri 1953-1964. Ankara:
Mülkiyeliler Birliği Vakfı Yayınları.
74
POEM
The Awaited Call*
Hüseyin Haydar**
(One Belt One Road Symphony)
The long-awaited call came today.
The sword fell from the hand of the cruellest
oppressor of the oppressors.
Do you know from whom the blessed call came?
A sun reddened in the skies of socialism.
Turned pale at that moment, the public enemy
executioner.
Which valiant man’s call was this incoming one?
The fruit of immortality of the people which
grows on time.
At the bottom of the rocks, the flowers suddenly
cheered up,
The crying baby laughed; the white lambs bleated.
The message of wisdom arrived today,
Our powers became stronger, our minds became
wiser.
Come on, open your doors to your doors,
Let's tie a belt, let's belt a road.
Did you see that the ants crossed the mountain?
Our hands were dreamed, our hearts started to
talk:
The Asian ship full of love came out of the port.
Extend your hands to each other, open your arms,
Let your eyes stare into each other’s eyes, my
brothers.
The heart train unloaded; didn’t you see?
A letter of a comrade, a blessed greeting came.
From whom did the Chinese silk handkerchief
from the Silk Road come?
From Shanghai stone, from Beijing soil,
Through the cliffs and the mountains, from the
flying iron bird,
From the white bones of the martyrs of the
revolution.
The windy call that comes across its rivers,
It came from the sea, the land, the air.
Flowing from the steppe cliffs breathlessly,
Did you see the rose-laden waggons of Asia?
We are starting our blessed journey once again.
Not mortal gods, but immortal man standing:
Tell the eagle of the sky to come,
From one shoulder to another the greeting flew
and came.
In the Yellow River and the Euphrates Martyrs
resurrected,
The call kissed the beetles and bugs of the bronze
steppe.
Come on, let's gather in the Asian square,
Blackthorn rose bloomed on the marble; didn't
you see?
The long-awaited call came today: We're setting
off.
We are rearing up from the Mediterranean to the
Chinese Sea.
We will wrap the belt of peace round the waist of
the bride of the world,
With songs, we will make the Milky Way a crown
on her head.
We answered with the decision of Taurus, in the
language of the Euphrates:
Children of the same house, the same sun, we are
ready.
We are here! We are united with the sheaf of crop
of Asia.
* Translation: Nilgün Yorgancı
** Hüseyin Haydar was born in 1956 in Trabzon. He studied economics and finance. He worked as a member of the editorial board and as a te-
chnical director in YAZKO’s (Writers and Translators Cooperative) Literature and Translation magazines. His first poetry collection, Acı Türkücü,
won the 1981 Academy’s First Prize for Poetry. Later, many of his books were published and won national awards. He served as a member and
visual director of the Ulusal Kanal Broadcasting Board and as a member of the Turkish Writers’ Union (TYS) Board. He prepared and presented
the tv program titled Literature Front at Ulusal Kanal. He is a member of Patriotic Party Central Ruling Board and National Science Strategy
Center. He has been publishing his poems every week in his column titled Poet's Toil in Aydınlık newspaper for ten years.
How to cite: Haydar, H. (2021/2022). The awaited call. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 74.
75
CONFERENCE REPORT
76
*
The Sinology and Chinese Studies
Symposium: A Brand-New Unifying
Perspective of Chinese Studies in
Turkey
ANILSOLMAZ*
Introduction
BY ACCOMPLISHING THE AIMS OF THE
United Nation’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development 10 years ago, the People’s Repub-
lic of China has demonstrated the strength of
its economy as a global leader (Solmaz, 2021).
China’s rise is acknowledged by many count-
ries and, as a result, has inevitably spurred the
field of Chinese Studies. Indeed, the dominant
role of the Chinese language in socio-econo-
mic and socio-cultural aspects has also energi-
zed the field of Sinology – the study of Chinese
language, history, customs, and politics.
Engaging with Chinese Studies and con-
ducting original research will undoubtedly
benefit Turkey’s national interests. This is a
time that gives rise to, not only economic and
commercial concerns, but also security, strate-
gic, and cultural pressures as part of the symp-
toms of rising multipolarity. However, there
are two major problems faced by Turkey con-
cerning Chinese Studies: a) researchers often
obtain information from Western sources, b)
the field in Turkey has not reached maturity
yet. These two problems hinder Turkey’s abi-
lity to understand China and cause research to
be disconnected from China’s realities. Wes-
tern-centric studies have ignited anti-Chinese
sentiments in Turkey, which distorts Turkey’s
perception of China.
The current situation in Chinese Studies
and the predominance of research that lacks
a sound scientific basis necessitate the need
Anıl Solmaz is a master’s student in Chinese Language and Literature at Shanghai University. His research interests include historical linguis-
tics, field linguistics and language documentation, Chinese linguistics, Turkish languages.
Email: solmaz_4141@hotmail.com
*
Chinese Language and Literature, Shanghai University
How to cite: Solmaz, A. (2021/2022). The Sinology and Chinese studies symposium: A brand-new
unifying perspective of Chinese Studies in Turkey. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 76-82.
77
CONFERENCE REPORT
for a new beginning in this field. At this point,
one could argue that the Sinology and Chinese
Studies Symposium, which focuses on Turkey’s
interests and scientific rigor, has created a new
platform in this field and responded to the stra-
tegic needs in Turkey. In this article, I will try
to explain the importance, benefits, and short-
comings of the Symposium by discussing and
making suggestions for the future of this event,
which aims to establish itself as a tradition.
The First Sinology and Chinese Studies
Symposium
The foundations of the Symposium were first
laid out at the Sunday Talks1
meetings of the
Turkish Student Association (TÖB), which was
formed by Turkish students in China. The lea-
ders of this union, who temporarily returned
to Turkey due to the pandemic, continued its
activities in Turkey. They held online seminars2
with scholars from leading departments of Si-
nology, Chinese Language and Literature, and
Chinese Translation and Interpretation in Tur-
key, as well as institutions such as Shanghai Uni-
versity, which has lately emerged as a pioneer of
Turkish Studies in China. These events, which
brought Turkey and China together, revealed
the need for further developing the field of Chi-
nese Studies in Turkey.
Thereupon, the TÖB, the Belt & Road Ini-
tiative Quarterly (BRIQ), the Istinye University
Center for Belt & Road Studies, and the Istan-
bul University Chinese Language and Literature
Department formed the core staff and initiated
the First Sinology and Chinese Studies Sympo-
The Sinology and Chinese Studies Symposium was held on September 24-25, 2021.
1 See for detailed info. (Türk Öğrenci Birliği, n.d.)
2 See for online webinars. (Çin Türk Öğrenci Birliği, n.d.)
78
CONFERENCE REPORT
sium in Turkey. The number of co-organizers
was later increased to include the Embassy of
the People’s Republic of China in Turkey and
Shanghai International Studies University.
The Organizing and Scientific Committee
The Organizing Committee is the body
that best proves the unifying and inclusive
character of the Symposium. In particular,
the heads of departments in well-established
and leading universities in Turkey conducting
Sinology and Chinese Studies were invited to
the organizing committee. Inclusiveness was
ensured by inviting competent scholars from
other universities to the scientific committee.
The Organizing Committee of the First Sinology
and Chinese Studies Symposium is as follows;
• Mehmet Adnan AKFIRAT, Chairman of
the BRIQ Administrative Board
• Ruilin SHİ, Undersecretary of Culture,
The PRC Ankara Embassy
• Prof. Dr. Eyüp SARITAŞ, Head of the De-
partment of Chinese Language and Litera-
ture at Istanbul University
• Assoc. Prof. Gürhan Kırilen, Head of De-
partment of Sinology at Ankara University
DTCF
• Assoc. Prof. Efe Can GÜRCAN, Chair-
man of the Center for Belt and Road Stu-
dies at Istinye University
• Dr. Nurcan KALKIR, Head of the Depart-
ment of Chinese Language and Literature
at Erciyes University
Participants
79
CONFERENCE REPORT
• Mustafa ALTINKAYA, Chairman of TÖB
Beijing
• Anıl SOLMAZ, Chairman of TÖB Shan-
ghai
The Scientific Committee, under the
chairmanship of Prof. Dr. Eyüp SARITAŞ,
consists of fifteen scholars from Turkey
and China covering a wide range of
specializations, including Sinology, Chinese
Language and Literature, Chinese Translation
and Interpretation, International Relations,
Sociology, and History.3
With the Scientific Committee, which inc-
ludes scholars from Ankara Hacı Bayram Veli
University and Okan University, the Symposi-
um has brought together rooted and leading
institutions dealing with China and Chinese
in Turkey. This is an important step for the
first Symposium, but it is necessary to further
expand the scientific committee, make gre-
ater use of universities in China, and attract
scholars from Europe and the Americas. These
aims should be included in the success criteria
for future studies.
Participants and Proceedings
Four hundred and ninety-seven applications
were made to attend the two-day symposium,
which was organized as a “hybrid” of face-to-fa-
ce attendance at the Istinye University Congress
Center in Istanbul and online attendance on
Zoom on 24-25 September 2021. There were
also guests from Germany, America, Azerba-
Chinese Ambassador to Turkey
3 See (Sinoloji Sempozyumu, n.d.)
80
CONFERENCE REPORT
ijan, India, and the Netherlands, though most
attended from Turkey and China. Such diver-
sity is undoubtedly a success for a symposium
held for the first time - it became an internati-
onal event.
Another feature of the Symposium was the
quality of the opening speeches. China’s Am-
bassador to Ankara and Turkey’s Ambassador
to Beijing acknowledged the significance of the
Symposium in their speeches. They emphasi-
zed how important this symposium is for the
two countries to get to know each other on a
scientific level and emphasized the importance
of joint work. Furthermore, the presented pa-
pers discussed a broad spectrum of topics, inc-
luding the Turkic languages spoken in China,
Wolfharm Eberhard and Turkish Sinology, the
geopolitical economy of China’s peaceful deve-
lopment, and the North Pacific Ocean Strategy
concerning China. A total of fifteen proceedin-
gs were presented and discussed in four sessi-
ons moderated by Assoc. Prof. Gurhan Kirilen,
Prof. Dr. Giray Fidan, Prof. Dr. Caner Karavit,
and Dr. Nurcan Kalkır, respectively.
The Importance of the Symposium for
Turkey And China Studies The Course of
Chinese Studies in Turkey
With the recent acceleration of diplomatic and
commercial relations, Turkey’s interest in Chi-
nese Studies has increased. This is also thanks
to becoming the second-largest economy in the
world. Our historical and intersecting ties, ex-
hibited by the findings of Pre-Islamic Turkish
history from the Chinese pages, trace Chinese
Studies in Turkey back even further than we
Prof.Dr. Eyüp Sarıtaş, Head of the Scentific Committee
81
CONFERENCE REPORT
thought. However, the field of Chinese Studies
in Turkey owes its current status to the pione-
ering studies of Wolfram Eberhard. His work,
History of China (Eberhard, 1947), published
by the Turkish Historical Society, is his best-
known work alongside his articles and lectures.
After leaving Turkey for the University of Cali-
fornia in 1949, he continued his studies in the
United States. After this period, Chinese Stu-
dies in Turkey went into stagnation.
Though, it would not be correct to say that
the Chinese studies in Turkey came to an end
with Eberhard’s departure to the United States.
Today, Chinese Studies are kept alive thanks to
the proliferation of academic events and rese-
arch centers in Turkey. Although most of the
studies carried out in Turkey after Eberhard
fall within the domain of Classical Chinese Stu-
dies, China’s socio-economic and socio-cultu-
ral achievements have pushed Contemporary
China Studies to the fore. The departments of
Sinology and Chinese Language and Literature,
which are included in universities such as An-
kara University and Istanbul University, contri-
bute to this field. In addition to these, Turkish
universities are trying to meet the needs of this
field by establishing Chinese Research Centers
(see Istanbul Aydın University). Recently, the
field of International Relations has focused on
China and started to examine Chinese move-
ments such as the Belt and Road Initiative . A
case in point is the Istinye University Center for
Belt & Road Studies, which is the first research
center to focus its efforts on the Belt and Road
in Turkey.
Undoubtedly, the number of such initiatives
in China Studies will increase as Turkey’s fore-
ign policy increasingly focuses on Asia. At this
point, the most important task is to consolidate
the field of Chinese Studies, which offers a sys-
tematic and solid philosophy.
The New Perspective offered by the
Symposium into China Studies
At this point, the First Symposium of Sinology
and Chinese Studies has built a new unity by
bringing Sinology and Chinese Studies toget-
her. A ship, whose route was not drawn by ex-
perts and could not successfully take the wind
behind it, would not reach the targeted place.
The Symposium’s Organizing and Scientific
Committee will be the new route and wind for
the field of Chinese Studies in Turkey. The main
philosophy of the Symposium is to explain Chi-
na to Turkey and Turkey to China from the
authentic and primary sources and to enable
both countries to benefit from each other using
scientific methods. It has refreshed the field of
Contemporary Chinese Studies in Turkey by
refuting the arguments of research centers that
have become tools for political purposes and
Although most of the studies
carried out in Turkey after
Eberhard fall within the domain of
Classical Chinese Studies, China's
socio-economic and socio-cultural
achievements have pushed
Contemporary China Studies to
the fore.
82
CONFERENCE REPORT
institutions that imitate the West. This move-
ment is unifying and integrating, which will
ensure a sound future for China Studies.
Another important element is the feature
of the Symposium that appeals to China. Gi-
ven that the field of Turkish Studies in China
has just started to mature, it is an indisputable
fact that China also needs to reach first-hand
sources and especially the “authentic” sour-
ces. When such sources are examined, it will
be revealed that much false information has
been published about Turkey in line with the
information obtained from secondary (and
Western-centric) sources. A misleading picture
has been drawn about Turkey in Chinese public
opinion. In consideration of this problem, the
Symposium’s close contact with the Chinese
Embassy and the Turkish Studies Consortium
in China will have a positive impact on the re-
search of the two countries. In this respect, the
Symposium is not only an important platform
for Turkish researchers who are involved in
Chinese Studies but also a wider channel where
valuable researchers conducting Turkey Studies
in China can convey their views.
Conclusion
The First Symposium of Sinology and Chinese
Studies has been a breath of fresh air in Contem-
porary China Studies in Turkey with its techni-
cal and scientific aspects. It is the first and most
important step taken for the institutionalization
required in Turkish Sinology and Chinese Stu-
dies. With the international status it has gained,
the Symposium has also laid the foundation and
qualifications necessary to broadcast Turkey’s
accumulated knowledge in Contemporary Chi-
nese Studies to the world.
The Symposium has demonstrated theore-
tical knowledge by bringing together experts
from Turkey and China as part of the Organi-
zing and Scientific Committee. The most im-
portant task ahead is to expand the scope of
academic discussions by including everyone
who are involved in Chinese Studies on this
platform. For researchers from Turkey to reach
first-hand sources on China, it should act as a
mediator in creating opportunities for field and
archive studies in China. It should form a jour-
nal that will publish these studies and root this
journal for scientific purposes.
The First Symposium on Sinology and Chi-
nese Studies was concluded successfully. We
left behind a historical milestone in the field of
Chinese Studies in Turkey. The period we are
in is critical for Turkey to better recognize and
understand China’s national aspirations. This
makes it necessary for all valuable Chinese re-
searchers in Turkey to make use of this sympo-
sium with the highest efficiency. See you at the
next symposium!
References
Çin Türk Öğrenci Birliği. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://
www.youtube.com/channel/
UCSZ4QWoft4eRRkGzElS_kEA
Eberhad, W. (1947). Çin Tarihi. Ankara: Türk Tarih
Kurumu.
Sinoloji Sempozyumu. (n.d.). Scientific Committee.
Retrieved from https://www.sinolojisempozyumu.
turkogrencibirligi.org/en/scientificcommittee/
Solmaz, A. (2021). Çin’in Yoksullukla Mücadele
Tarihçesi. Teori, 379, 63-69.
Türk Öğrenci Birliği. (n.d.). Events. Retrieved from
https://turkogrencibirligi.org/etkinlikler/
83
FORUM REPORT
Building the Shared Future of
Humanity Through Sports:
Towards the 2022 Winter Olympics
ARDATUNÇEL*
THE 2022 WINTER OLYMPICS WILL BE HELD
in Beijing from February 4-20. The Olympics,
which is generally considered one of the “fairest”
sports platforms in the world, and where every
country can send its athletes under equal condi-
tions, continues in all its glory even under pande-
mic conditions. The contest keeps our hopes alive
for a more equal, just and peaceful world. Howe-
ver, hegemonic approaches, led by the USA, to
regulate developing countries via a “human righ-
ts” policy, endager the egalitarian nature of the
Olympics, which values all nations equally. The
United States considering the possibility of boy-
cotting the Beijing Winter Olympics points to the
seriousness of this threat. Although there is no
final boycott decision as yet, the widespread co-
verage of some of the protests in Western media
outlets make it necessary to revisit the Olympics
and its misuses in international politics. Within
this framework, the “Building the Shared Fu-
ture of Humanity Through Sports: Towards
the 2022 Winter Olympics” forum was held on
20 November 2021 at Istinye University Valley
Campus and via Zoom, under the leadership of
the Turkish Student Union in China, Belt and
Road Initiative Quarterly (BRIQ), and The Istin-
ye University Center for Belt and Road Studies.
The forum served as an open platform for debate
around the questions below:
• What methods do Western states use to in-
tervene in developing countries through the
Olympics?
Arda Tunçel was born in 1995 in Ankara. In 2019, he graduated from Department of International Relations at Ihsan Dogramaci Bilkent Uni-
versity. During his BA, he carried out a research project on ‘One Belt One Road’ and wrote a research paper. He worked as a Student Brand
Manager at Red Bull Turkey company in 2017-2019. In September 2019, he began his MA on international trade at Shanghai University. He is
currently working on the effects of the Belt and Road Initiative on the relationship between Turkey and China. He is currently a board member
of the “Association of Turkish Student in China”. Email: ardatuncel.ch@yandex.com
*
Organizing Committee Secretary of the Forum
How to cite: Tunçel, A. (2021/2022). Final report of building the shared future of humanity through
sports: Towards the 2022 winter olympics forum. Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 83-85.
84
FORUM REPORT
• How can we save the Olympics, which is the
people’s sports holiday, from the interventi-
on of Western states?
• How can we ensure that the Olympics fulfil-
ls its promise as the symbol of nations com-
peting in sports on equal terms, peacefully
and for cohesion?
• What are the roles played by the Olympics
in building the shared future of humanity?
The opening speakers of the forum were Ad-
nan Akfırat (President of the China Business
Development Friendship Association and Cha-
irman of the BRIQ), Suat Çelen (President of the
Turkish Gymnastics Federation), Erdem Doğan,
Sports Director of the Turkish National Olym-
pic Committee, and Liu Shaobin (Ambassador
of the People’s Republic of China to Ankara).
In the opening speeches of the forum, the
speakers emphasized that the Beijing Winter
Olympics will be a shining example of the ri-
sing Asian Civilization, that any behavior to
overshadow the role of the Olympics in building
the shared future of humanity together is detri-
mental, and that Turkey is also carrying out its
Olympic preparations in accordance with this
mission. Speaking on behalf of the organizing
committee, Adnan Akfırat stated that US Pre-
sident Biden’s “diplomatic boycott” statement
is not only displaying an arrogance towards the
host country, but also against all humanity and
therefore should be condemned.
Adnan Akfırat conveyed the mission state-
ments of the Beijing Winter Olympics:
• Let’s instill the Olympic spirit in the youth
of the world!
• Let’s encourage millions to embrace winter
sports!
• Let’s promote social progress through the
winter games!
• Let’s create a world of harmony for all hu-
manity by developing mutual understan-
ding!
85
FORUM REPORT
The opening speeches were followed by the first
session of the forum, entitled “The Role of Sport
in Creating the Shared Future of Humanity”. This
session was moderated by the President of the Repub-
lican Woman’s Association and former Vice Rector of
Gazi University, Professor Tülin Oygür. The contribu-
tors included Cevad Prekazi (Albanian origin –for-
mer Yugoslavian football player), Sümeyye Boyacı
(National Paralympic swimmer), Hakan Reçber (Na-
tional taekwondo athlete), and Ljubodrag Simonović
(philosopher, writer and retired Yugoslavian basket-
ball player).
The speakers expressed their views regarding the
impact of sports on life and personal development,
the significance of state planning and social policies
for the development of sports, the role of sports in
cultural interactions, and the contribution of sports
to world peace. The statements expressed by the spe-
akers, including world-famous and medal-winning,
about the impact of the Olympics on social and indi-
vidual progress, once again revealed the importance
of this forum. In the closing speech of the first ses-
sion, the moderator, Professor Tülin Oygür, underli-
ned that the Olympics are an important step towards
building the shared future of humanity together, and
emphasized the importance of sports in the fight aga-
inst drugs, which is one of the biggest threats to the
future of humanity. At this point, Tülin Oygür called
for support and cooperation with the Mothers Mo-
vement, which was initiated by the Republican Wo-
men’s Association, against drugs.
The second session of the forum, “Western Poli-
tics of Human Rights and Olympics” was modera-
ted by Assistant Professor Suat Eren Özyiğit, head of
the Department of International Relations at İstinye
University. The contributors included Assoc. Prof.
Fahri Erenel (Director of the Istinye University So-
cial Sciences Institute), Assoc. Prof. Umut Başoğlu
(President of General Gymnastics Movement Trai-
ning Technical Committee) and Deputy Chairman of
Turkish Orienteering Federation), and Hüseyin Cem
Zeren (Columnist and risk expert).
While Umut Başoğlu explained his views on how
the deficiencies in physical literacy lead our society
towards obesity and harmful habits, Fahri Erenel and
Hüseyin Cem Zeren shared their view that the US
accuses China of human rights violations, regardless
of its own actions, because the US has fallen behind
in economic terms and has lost its claim to dominate
the world. In addition to these opinions, the speakers
stated that peace and sports are part of the innate
human rights and that the US is preventing this with
its current attitude. In parallel with this, Fahri Erenel
emphasized that the word ‘boycott’ is the most dan-
gerous word for the Olympics as well as for humanity.
He went on to call for the world’s citizens to reject
such harmful attitudes. In the closing of the session,
Suat Eren Özyiğit thanked the speakers and asked
Professor Osman Ünver to deliver the closing speech.
In his speech, Professor Osman Ünver, stated that,
if the essence of the Olympics can be preserved, there
is still an important opportunity for world peace and
that all humanity should take a stand against discus-
singaboycottinordertoestablishthecommonfuture
of humanity through the medium of sport. On behalf
of the organizing committee, which consists of Arda
Tunçel (Member of the Board of the Turkish Student
Union in China), Anıl Solmaz (Shanghai representa-
tive of the Turkish Student Union in China, Adnan
Akfırat (Chairman of the Board of BRIQ journal),
Assoc. Prof. Efe Can Gürcan (Director of the Istinye
University Center for Belt and Road Studies), Semih
Nişancı (Sports Journalist); Anıl Solmaz expressed
his thanks to the speakers and participants.
Thespeakersstatedthatpeaceand
sportsarepartoftheinnatehuman
rightsandthattheUSispreventing
thiswithitscurrentattitude.
86
BOOK REVIEW
A Thousand Readers,
A Thousand Hamlets:
A Chinese Scholar’s
Response to the Ten Hot
Issues about the Belt &
Road Initiative
LINING*
Li Ning is a master’s candidate majoring in World History in the College of Liberal Arts at Shanghai University. Her research fields include
Turkish modernization and Kemal’s reforms in Turkish rural areas, such as the Turkish Ocak, the People’s Houses, and the Village Institutes.
Email: enya510124@163.com
ORCID: 0000-0002-8886-3876
*
Department of History, College of Liberal Arts, Shanghai University
Wang Yiwei. (2020).
Response: Ten Voices on the “Belt and Road Initiative”.
Tianjin: Tianjin People’s Publishing House.
How to cite: Li, N. (2021/2022). A Thousand Readers, A Thousand Hamlets: A Chinese Scholar’s Response
to the Ten Hot Issues about the Belt & Road Initiative. [Review of the book “Response: Ten Voices on the “Belt
and Road Initiative” by Wang, Y.] Belt and Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 86-89.
SINCE 2013, THE BELT AND ROAD
Initiative (BRI) has become a pressing concern
for the international community. The BRI is an
international cooperation initiative put forward
by China in response to major changes and new
challenges unique to the present. There have been
multiple voices doubting, misunderstanding, and
criticizing the initiative from home and abroad. In
response to this, Professor Wang Yiwei, who co-
mes from the Chongyang Institute for Financial
Studies and National Academy of Development
and Strategy at the Renmin University of China,
has systematically responded to various questi-
ons from the Chinese people, Western countries,
and countries along the BRI in his book, Respon-
se: Ten Voices on the “Belt and Road Initiative”
(2020). The book examines what the initiative is,
its purpose, and how to promote it.
In chapter 1, the author questions whether the
BRI should spend its money on foreign invest-
87
BOOK REVIEW
ment. For some Chinese people, the domestic
economy is facing downward pressure and needs
investment, so why should China turn outwards?
According to Prof. Wang, the initiative is desig-
ned to tackle two major domestic problems: the
country’s unsustainable development model and
the effects of globalization. Consequently, Chi-
na’s development has transformed from a model
relying on export and foreign direct investment
to a model of investment and innovation with a
long-term aim of building inclusive globalization
to fight against protectionism. Only in this way
can China break the containment of some Wes-
tern countries. Therefore, investing in infrastruc-
ture, energy, ports, and people’s livelihood proje-
cts contributing to improvement of their national
economy along the BRI countries will help stren-
gthen the strategic economic dependence of these
countries, form a community of common destiny,
and reduce dependence on the West.
Chapter 1 continues by questioning whether
this initiative is an over-expanding project. Prof.
Wang demonstrates how it is not from three pers-
pectives. First, from the perspective of supply and
demand, BRI construction addresses China’s over-
capacity, the co-construction of China’s high-qua-
lity and surplus production capacity, and the need
for co-construction in the country’s development.
Second, the BRI is not like the Marshall Plan, whi-
ch combined economic with military expansion,
but an opportunity to reach international public
goods, provided by China, for the countries along
the route. Third, this initiative is not a political
initiative but an economic initiative. Therefore,
private enterprises should become the mainstay of
the BRI instead of state-owned enterprises. Both
parties and participating companies must obtain
benefits.
The third question of chapter 1 discusses “how
to avoid risks in the construction of the BRI”. As
Prof. Wang argues, the BRI is composed of “five
communications”, namely policy connectivity,
infrastructure connectivity, trade connectivity, fi-
nance connectivity, and people connectivity - each
will face risks. Geographical risks threaten policy
communication. Infrastructure connectivity nee-
ds to deal with security risks. Trade and finance
connectivities are affected by economic and legal
risks. If people’s hearts cannot be connected, the
BRI can be morally trapped.
The biggest risk does come from developed
countries and their specific issues of debt, stan-
dards, geopolitics, and transparency. These doubts
reflect the distrust of the Chinese model in develo-
ped countries. In this regard, China must open up
to the world, for only when the BRI has achieved
results and the countries along the route exemplify
this development will Western doubts truly disap-
pear.
Chapter 2 addresses the fourth question of
whether the BRI is like the “Marshall Plan”. Prof.
Wang acknowledges that there are similarities
between the two projects in promoting economic
development, strengthening exchanges and coo-
peration between regional countries, and enhan-
The BRI is composed of “five
communications”, namely policy
connectivity, infrastructure
connectivity, trade connectivity,
finance connectivity, and people
connectivity - each will face risks.
88
BOOK REVIEW
cing the regional influence of the initiator count-
ries, but the former is fundamentally different
from the latter. First, the Marshall Plan, with its
Cold War background and ideological color, was
part of the US’s aspiration for global hegemony,
while the BRI is the outcome of China’s all-around
opening-up. Second, the former takes camp and
ideology as the criterion of participation, while the
latter takes inclusiveness and openness. However,
Prof. Wang also suggests that the BRI can learn
from the Marshall Plan regarding its implementa-
tion and publicity.
The fifth question discusses whether there is a
debt crisis in the “Belt and Road” construction.
Prof. Wang does not agree with the statement that
China is pursuing a “debt diplomacy” through the
BRI. First, Western countries focus on this topic
to frame other countries. They have done this be-
fore, so it is inferred that China will do the same.
Second, from the perspective of debt background
or debt structure, China is not the largest creditor
of developing countries, and the so-called “debt
crisis” in the construction of the “Belt and Road”
is nothing but alarmist talk. Third, the BRI is “ra-
ising chickens and laying eggs” rather than “kil-
ling the hen for her eggs”, in that China advocates
international cooperation to solve the debt crisis.
The Chapter 2 handles the sixth question,
whether the BRI is challenging international rules
and the mechanism of the BRI is open and trans-
parent. And this initiative is rule-oriented or de-
velopment-oriented. These are typical questions
from the West after the initiative was put forward.
Prof. Wang believes that “China will not and
need not start over and overthrow Western rules”
(p100). China owns a culture of learning, not one
of transmission, meaning China will likely not
export its model. The top priority is development
rather than rules, and development is the key to
solving the problems of participating countries
along the BRI.
The Chapter 2 also seeks an answer for the se-
venth question about whether the BRI is China’s
version of the World Trade Organization (WTO)?
Prof. Wang believes that this initiative promotes a
new type of globalization, having its own charac-
teristics. The BRI brings together the four major
civilizations of humankind: Egyptian civilization,
Babylonian civilization, Indian civilization, and
Chinese civilization. Thus, the logic of the com-
mon rejuvenation of civilizations surpasses the
logic of modern competition. The BRI creates a
civilized order with civilized countries as the ba-
sic unit, by this means, international politic leaps
from geopolitics, geoeconomics to geo-civilizati-
on. From a broad perspective, the Belt and Road
Initiative has largely helped landlocked countries
access the sea to realize land and sea connectivity.
Similarly, it should fit with the local customs and
religions and take root in a way that the local pe-
ople want.
Chapter 3 addresses the eighth question, does
the “Belt and Road” construction damage the en-
vironment? In fact, China has the most complex
ecological environment and the highest popula-
tion density. Relying on its superior application
The BRI brings together the four
major civilizations of humankind:
Egyptian civilization, Babylonian
civilization, Indian civilization, and
Chinese civilization.
89
BOOK REVIEW
capabilities, China has cultivated the world’s most
competitive green, low-carbon technology and
sustainable development model. It is in the process
of sharing the modernization experience. Therefo-
re, on the issue of development sustainability, the
author calls on all countries to believe in China
with the courage of “the duck” that “witnesses the
warmth of the river first in the spring” and actively
participate in the construction of BRI.
The chapter continues with the ninth question,
does “Belt and Road” construction lead to differen-
tiation? Prof. Wang cites the cooperation between
China and Latin America as an example. He po-
ints out that China’s BRI is in line with the needs of
Latin American countries to respond to the midd-
le-income trap. Through the new industrialization
road, correcting the Western colonial system, inc-
reasing horizontal interconnection, complemen-
ting the shortcomings of infrastructure, guiding
the flow of hot money to the real economy, curing
the chronic diseases of neoliberal globalization,
and eliminating the root causes of the global finan-
cial crisis, Latin America is actively co-construc-
ting the BRI, and development has been achieved.
Therefore, this case shows that the BRI will not
lead to differentiation.
The tenth question examines whether the cons-
truction of the “Belt and Road” creates a strategic
dependency on China. The BRI aspires to create
“a road of peace”, “a road of prosperity”, “a road of
openness”, and so on. It aims to gradually elimina-
te the world’s three major deficits: peace, develop-
ment, and governance. It also emphasizes strategic
docking and interconnection. Its purpose is to eli-
minate the barriers caused by geopolitics, elimina-
te the pain caused by colonial divide and rule, and
finally realize people-to-people bonds.
In general, the book successfully condenses
questions about the BRI in China and the world
today. Based on years of international relations
research and experience in more than fifty count-
ries, the author has provided convincing answers
to these questions, which allows not only foreign
readers to understand a real “Belt and Road Ini-
tiative” but also allows many Chinese readers to
have a deeper understanding of this initiative, Chi-
na’s development model, and China’s globalization
propositions.
However, the book also has certain flaws. For
example, when the author outlines reasons for qu-
estioning the BRI, he always emphasizes the factors
of international interest disputes, national strategic
layout, and ideological orientation. We cannot
deny the misunderstandings brought about by the
above factors, but what is more noteworthy is that
race, ethnicity, and religion in BRI countries are
also important considerations. These factors relate
to people-to-people bonds and should, therefore,
be the starting point for China to respond to and
resolve the voices that question the “Belt and Road
Initiative”.
The author has provided
convincing answers, which
allows not only foreign readers
to understand a real BRI but also
allows many Chinese readers to
have a deeper understanding
of this initiative, China’s
development model, and China’s
globalization propositions.
The 15th WAPE Forum will be held on 18-19
December 2021, at Shanghai International
Studies University, China. International parti-
cipants will attend online due to COVID. This
forum will be co-organized by World Associati-
on for Political Economy, Greek Association of
Political Economy, and Shanghai International
Studies University.
The broad theme of the conference focuses
on the controversy between the two main alter-
native traditions in economic analysis, Political
Economy and Economics. Economics (with
their myopic understanding of the economy as
simply market relations, neglect of social and
political factors and class struggle and their al-
most overt support for capital against labour)
has been historically proved incapable of gras-
ping how economies work and forecast and
confront competently economic crises. On the
other hand, Political Economy (offering a social
understanding of the economy, focusing on the
sphere of production, linking economic analy-
sis to social and political factors and to class
struggle) has been more successful in comp-
rehending the actual workings of the economy
and in analyzing economic crises. However,
despite their long-standing failures, Economics
continue to dominate academia and policy-ma-
king centers, especially in the West. Even after
the last global economic crisis and its blatant
failure to foresee and to resolve it, its domi-
nance remains unwavered as it is supported by
strong vested class interests. Nevertheless, there
is growing unrest within both the academia and
the society with this failed dominance. Political
Economy is the main approach towards which
all those dissatisfied with Economics turn.
This conference aims to juxtapose Political
Economy and Economics and contrast their
positions on the various fields and areas of eco-
nomic analysis. Within its broad theme, WAPE
2021 invites all contributions that enrich the
perspective of Political Economy and expand
the ground for further discussion. Indicatively
but not exclusively, proposed papers can touch
upon the following issues:
THE FIFTEENTH FORUM OF THE WORLD
ASSOCIATION FOR POLITICAL ECONOMY
Rethinking Economic Analysis: Perspective of Political Economy
18-19 December 2021
Shanghai International Studies University, China
1) Curriculum reform in Economics: How Poli-
tical Economy can challenge Economics’ domi-
nance of university curricula
2) Contemporary controversies in Macroe-
conomics: Neoclassicism, Keynesianism and
Marxism
• Neoliberalism and the New Macroecono
mic Consensus
• Marxism and Macro-economic modelling
• How to evaluate US mainstream economics
with Marxist Political Economy
3) History of Political Economy
4) New developments of Marxist Political Eco-
nomy in contemporary China
5) Economic History
6) Theory of stages and periodization of capi-
talism
7) Theories and analyses of economic crisis
8) Profitability, crises and economic cycles
9) Race, class and gender
10) Methodology of economic analysis
11) Trends and challenges in contemporary
economic policy
• Neoconservative economic policies
• Economic planning, fiscal and monetary
policies reconsidered
• A return of industrial policy?
12) Marxism and the Political Economy of mo-
ney and finance
13) Labour process, markets and the Political
Economy of Work
• Labour movement and Trade Unions
• Flexible employment and unemployment
• The current state of Labour Process Theory
14) The Political Economy of poverty and
inequality
• Austerity and the welfare system
• The current state of social policy
15) Political Economy of education
16) Political Economy of health and health po-
licies
17) Environmental Political Economy
18) Urban and regional economics
19) Law and Political Economy
20) World economy: globalization or imperia-
lism?
• International conflicts and imperialism
• The retreat of US hegemony and the emer
gence of a multi-polar world system
• Political Economy of capital flows
• BRICS, the newly emerging economies and
the world economy
• Global value chains and transnational
corporations
• Political Economy of foreign direct invest
ment (FDI)
• International Political Economy
21) Political Economy of European integration
and the Eurozone crisis
22) Development studies at an impasse
• Developmental state after the Post-Washin
gton Consensus
• Role and policies of international organiza
tions (IMF, WB, WHO, UNHCR,UN etc.)
23) Country case studies
WAPE 2021 Forum- Turkey Panel (Webinar)
Time (Beijing Time):
18 December 2021, 14.00-15.40
Duration: 100 minutes
Topic:
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECLINE ANDWHATTO DO ABOUT IT:
TURKEY'S LESSONS FORTHE DEVELOPINGWORLD
Moderator:
Adnan Akfırat, Chairman of the BRIQ Journal
Panelists:
1. Turkey’s Program of Carrying Out A “Production Revolution”:
The Road to Revolution in the Developing World
Speaker: Dr. Doğu Perinçek, Chairman of Patriotic Party (TURKEY)
2. Debunking the Neoliberal Agenda of “Downsizing the State”:
What is the Role of the National State in Development?
Speaker: Prof. Dr. Semih Koray, Bilkent University
3.The Transformation of the Turkish Economy in the 2000s:
A Balance Sheet of Neoliberalism
Speaker: Assoc. Prof. Dr. Efe Can Gürcan, İstinye University
4.How Universal is Turkey’s Kemalist Economic Development Model?
Speaker: Dr. Kuntay Gücüm, Editor in Chief of Teori journal
Discussant:
Prof. Dr. Sencer İmer
Ufuk University, Head of the Department for Political Science and International Relations
KAYIHAN KESKİNOK
PAINTING
93
How to cite: [Painting by Kayıhan Keskinok]. (2021/2022). Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 93.
Kayıhan Keskinok was born in 1923 in İzmir. He graduated from Gazi Eğitim Enstitüsü [Gazi Institute of Educa-
tion] in Ankara. In 1960, he made postgraduate study at Ecole de Beaux Arts [School of Fine Arts] in Lausanne.
Between 1963-1968, he lectured in the Department of Painting at Gazi Institute of Education. He worked at TRT
(Turkish Radio and Television Institution). Besides individual exhibitions of more than 40, he also participated in
joint exhibitions in Turkey and abroad. His major paintings are available both in private collections and at State
museums. He worked as a freelance artist and lectured at Sanatyapım Gallery, Art Studio between 1982-2012.
He defined his art as a kind of figuralism based on anatomic values. Passed away on April 18, 2015 in Ankara,
Keskinok was honored various awards including “Ministry of Culture, 50th Anniversary of Republic, Competition
in Painting and Sculpture, Award of Atatürk and Republic”, “Republican Senate, Atatürk Painting Competition,
first prize”, “Ministry of Culture, Painting Competition on Atatürk and his Revolutions, first prize”, “International
Association of Fine Arts, Honored Award”, “GESAM Honored Award.
94
KİTAP İNCELEME
SITKI FIRAT
PHOTOGRAPHY ART
How to cite: [Photograph by Sıtkı Fırat]. (2021/2022). Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 94.
Sıtkı Fırat was born in Kemaliye/Erzincan- Turkey. He was interested in photography art while he was studying
at Gazi Institute of Education. He was impressed by Şinasi Barutçu, his teacher. He studied Photography and
Business Education in Germany, where he was sent with the support of the state in 1966. In 1980, he estab-
lished the Fıratcolor Color photography laboratory with his sons Aykut and Artuk. He traveled to more than
30 countries and held exhibitions. After his exhibitions, “Turkey” in Beijing in 1989 and “China” in Ankara,
he was invited to China for a project on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the People’s Republic of China
in 1999. His photographs were published in the book, “Focus on China”. Having over 100 exhibitions at home
and abroad, Sıtkı Fırat was awarded the “International Turkish World Service Award” by TÜRKSAV in 1998,
the “Doyen Artist of the Year” by International Federation of Photographic Art (FIAP) in 2001, and the title of
“Photography Artist of the Year” by the Ministry of Culture. Having many books on photography, he was also
the owner of the “Culture and Arts Grand Award”. The great Master of Photography, Sıtkı Fırat, passed away
on June 16, 2016.
95
KİTAP İNCELEME
RİFAT MUTLU
CARTOON
Rifat Mutlu is a medical doctor specializing in neurosurgery. During serving as a doctor, he served as an Execu-
tive Committee member of the Izmir Medical Chamber in Turkey. He worked at the Umea University and the
Uppsala University in Sweden, which conducted research and studies on the surgery of people with disabilities.
After returning to Turkey, Mutlu, who worked as a neurosurgeon in public hospitals, served as the Provincial
Director of the Agency for Social Services and Children Protection in Izmir. Mutlu, who started to work as the
Deputy Secretary General of Izmir Metropolitan Municipality in 1999, established the first Emergency Rescue
Health Project in Turkey, “AKS-110”. He created the “Council of Disabled People” and the “Center for Youth
with Disabilities”. Rifat Mutlu, a member of the Cartoonists Society in Turkey, served as the İzmir represen-
tative of the Cartoonists Society between 2012 and 2014. His comic strip, “Birileri”, was regularly published
in the local and national press between 2004 and 2011. He has two cartoon albums named “İki Gözüm İki
Çeşme” and “Birileri”, and a cartoon book, “Anatolian Anecdotes with Cartoons”. Having 11 personal cartoon
exhibitions, Mutlu still draws political cartoons for Aydınlık Newspaper. Rifat Mutlu, a member of the Central
Executive Board of the Patriotic Party, is currently Provincial Chairman of the Patriotic Party in Izmir.
ONE-TOOTHED
MONSTER
How to cite: [Cartoon by Rifat Mutlu]. (2021/2022). Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 3(1), 95.
