Former Minister for the
Development of the Russian Far East
Aleksandr Galushka
Alexander Galushka is the former Minister for the Development of the Russian Far East and
is currently Vice President of the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation. Mr. Galushka
graduated with honors from the Faculty of Economics of the Moscow State University of Social
Sciences with a specialization at the Russian G.V. Plekhanov Academy of Economics. Mr.
Galushka has published more than ten papers in economics, management and investment.
How to cite: Galushka, A. (2023). De-dolarization of the World Economy (Conference speech). BRIQ Belt
Road Initiative Quarterly, 5(1), 60-65.
De-Dollarization of the
World Economy*
RÖPORTAJ
CONFERENCE SPEECH
* This text is a transcription of Aleksandr Galushka’s speech at the session titled “The Non-Dollar Model of World
Economic Integration: A Supranational Currency and a New International Payments System as a Driving Force for the
Development of Regional and Global Trade” of the Vladivostok Eastern Economic Forum on September 3, 2021. The text
was transcribed and translated into Turkish by Arif Acaloğlu and translated from Turkish to English by Işıkgün Akfırat. The
title and subheadings have been added by BRIQ.
61
61
HISTORICALLY, RUSSIA JOINED THE DOLLAR-
centered world financial architecture 30 years
ago. The experience of the past 30 years allows
us to comprehensively assess what is happening
in the Russian and world economy. The most
important trend over these 30 years has been
the continuous flow of money out of Russia.
According to Bloomberg, between 1994 and
2018, about 1 trillion US dollars moved out
of the Russian Federation. The exception was
only two years (2006-2007) when the inflow of
money was higher.
It is clear enough that there is a consensus
among politicians and experts that the economic
model established in Russia is based on raw
materials and that this model has exhausted
itself. Given this consensus, it is impossible to
expect any inflow of capital into the Russian
Federation. In this context, the flow of over 80
billion US dollars from Russia to the Virgin
Islands in 2014, for example, is significant
enough. This is more than 70 times the total
economy of these islands. In July last year, the
Russian Central Bank raised its expectations for
the outflow of $35 billion from our country to
$50 billion this year.
At this point, it is important to note the
following: On the one hand, there is a total lack
of investment in our economy and an enormous
need for investment resources. On the other
hand, this most important issue is dominated by
the outflow of money in enormous sums.
“Paradoxical as it may seem, the world economic order behaves (as a rule)
only as net exporters of capital. When we look at the ratio of external
debt to GDP, we see that in the developed countries, the core of the world
economic system, this ratio is expressed in three-digit percentages.
In developing countries, on the other hand, the ratio of external debt
to GDP is expressed in double digits. This is based on the following de
facto situation: an unbalanced exchange of value between the countries
that form the core of the world economy and the countries that are the
periphery of this economy.”
CONFERENCE SPEECH
62
62
Capital Transfer from the
Periphery to the Centre
It should also be added that this is not unique
to the Russian developing economy. It is a world
economy-wide problem; it is a problem for all
developing economies. Paradoxical as it may
seem, the world economic order behaves (as a
rule) only as net exporters of capital. When we
look at the ratio of external debt to GDP, we
see that in developed countries, the core of the
world economic system, this ratio is expressed in
three-digit percentages (100 percent or more). In
developingcountries,ontheotherhand,theratio
of external debt to GDP is expressed in double
digits (10 percent and above). This is based on
the following de facto situation: an unbalanced
exchange of value between the countries that
form the core of the world economy and the
countries that are the periphery of this economy.
Given that the Russian economy is essentially
a peripheral raw material economy within the
world economic system, there is no chance of
money flowing towards Russia from the global
architecture under the current model.
At the heart of this situation is the global
income gap: Developing countries that have
built up their own reserves do so from assigned,
certain, risk-free assets with low rates of
return. An objective assessment of these low-
return, risk-free assets shows a low return on
reserves. On the other hand, the returns on
external financial resources have higher rates
of return than those in Russia’s reserves. Such
a global income gap is one of the most serious
foundations of this unbalanced exchange in the
global economy and the constant movement of
capital from the periphery to the core countries.
It is clearly visible that this has been the
case for decades. This contradiction, this de
facto situation, is also evident when we look at
economies’ size, purchasing power, and GDPs as
measured by currency parity. In fact, we can see
this trend between 1991 and 2019, which speaks
volumes. This gap between purchasing power
and the exchange rate in the world economy
increased 6-fold, from 7 trillion to 46 trillion
in US dollars. As a rule, this deficit has been
more pronounced in the peripheral economies
of the world economic system, in developing
economies, and one of them—Russia.
The world is experiencing the pressure of
politics on the economy, trade wars, threats of
freezing accounts, limiting payments, and using
the dollar infrastructure of SWIFT as part of
sanctions. The country that produces the world’s
reserve currency, the United States of America,
may unexpectedly apply all these measures
against different countries. The target country
could be Western European countries or Asian
countries. Almost all countries have experienced
or felt this reality in recent years.
Structural Conflict
In terms of the methodology of shaping
the world financial architecture, there is
nothing new in principle in the theoretical
dimension of this issue, in other words, in the
methodology of this problem. This has all been
known for a long time and is the structural,
fundamental point. The fact that the national
currency of a country (and it doesn’t matter
which country it is, I want to emphasize that)
suddenly becomes the reserve currency of the
whole world is an environment of conflict of
interests, and this conflict is structural. This
situation was described a long time ago, exactly
CONFERENCE SPEECH
63
63
50 years ago, as the Triffin Paradox. That
description identified a continuous, structural,
permanent and essentially insoluble conflict
of interests. This is because a certain party
has its own monetary interests in line with its
national interests, and its currency is accepted
as a reserve instrument. Meanwhile, the world
economy has different interests and priorities.
Again, from the point of view of world
economic thought, there is not only an
identification of this problem but also an
alternative solution. This alternative was
proposed as early as the beginning of the
20th century by the great Russian economist
Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky. These ideas were
also echoed in the thoughts of John M. Keynes,
a prominent figure in world economic thought.
At a conference in 1944, Keynes proposed not
the adoption of the US dollar as the world
reserve currency but the creation of a World
Payments Union and adopting a special,
transnational, cashless form of currency, which
he called the “Bancor”.
As for the possibility of realizing such
a practical idea, there will be a successful
experience in Eastern Europe. Between 1964 and
1990, a cashless currency was created to service
foreign economic activity: The transferable
ruble. These transferable roubles were used
not only in the framework of the economic
relations of Eastern European countries (at
that time, it was a planned economy) but also
in their trade with countries with market
economies (e.g. Finland, Mexico, Iraq). In 1979,
15 years later than in Eastern Europe, this kind
of transnational, cashless “European Currency
Unity (ECU)” was introduced on a large scale
in Western Europe. This currency later evolved
into the “euro”, reflecting the further monetary
integration of the countries of the European
Union.
The IMF mentioned here has used
cashless, transnational currencies since 1969
as a form of special borrowing rights. As is
known, not so long ago, the IMF doubled the
issuance of these special borrowing rights.
CONFERENCE SPEECH
Illustrative comparison of the average JPM EMBI Global Diversified USD bond yields per region with the 10-year bond
yields of Germany, and the United States from January 2022 to May 2023. UN Global Crisis Response Group calculations
based on (April 2023) IMF World Economic Outlook (Photo: UNCTAD, 2023).
Retrieved November 1, 2023 from https://unctad.org/publication/world-of-debt
Figure 1. Developing countries pay much more for their borrowing
BondYields (2022-2023)
64
64
At the level of the symptoms of what is
happening in the world economy, it is clear that
this approach is a reaction to the problems that
have been accumulating for years and decades
and are now particularly intensifying. And the
doubling of the volume of this transnational
currency in the world economy is related to
this.
If one listens to the views of the heads of the
central banks of different countries, it becomes
clear that they urge that the world financial
architecture has exhausted itself and that the
US dollar should be abandoned as the world’s
reserve currency. Many people can be cited here,
but it is important to note that the Governor of
the Bank of England, Mark Carney, said that the
dollar as a reserve currency has exhausted its
potential and that new solutions must be found.
The Governors of the People’s Bank of China said
the same thing.
The first is the diagnosis of the situation, the
second is the theory and practice of different
solutions, and the third is the increasing
relevance of the practice of different solutions.
Today, it is very important that we discuss these
issues within the scope of our panel. It is much
better to discuss these issues in advance and with
a preventive approach than to be late (and there
is actually no such thing as “being late”, but it can
be much more difficult when it is late).
Algorithm of the New Financial
Architecture
While discussing the theoretical side of the
issue, the best solutions, the next strategic steps,
and the algorithm for building a new financial
architecture are on the agenda. Today, when we
look at the balance of trade of Russia with many
countries (countries of the Eurasian Union,
China, India, and many European countries),
the volume of goods we send there and the
volume of goods we receive there are large
enough—they coincide. But why do we mainly
use dollars and not, for example, clearing? To
make payments without using the currency
of third countries, world economic thought
has created this instrument, the institution of
clearing. It would be wise to start with bilateral
clearing with countries with which we have a
large trade volume. Moreover, modern digital
technologies can make this process much
simpler. As a matter of fact, it is much simpler
to do this today than it was after World War II
when clearing became widespread.
This is the first step, and the second
step logically follows. This step involves
the formation of international clearing
payments in addition to bilateral clearing and
establishing an International Clearing Union
that can deal with this problem based on
platforms such as the Eurasian Union and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. Logically
Thisstepinvolvestheformation
ofinternationalclearing
paymentsinadditiontobilateral
clearingandestablishingan
InternationalClearingUnion
thatcandealwiththisproblem
basedonplatformssuchasthe
EurasianUnionandtheSCO.
CONFERENCE SPEECH
65
65
and naturally, the next step, the next stage of
establishing such a financial architecture in the
world, is the transition to a payments union;
more clearly, the transition from clearing to a
payments union. This system, which ensures
international trade, international payments,
and the functioning of international economic
relations, can be established based on a very
rich experience, an understandable theory, a
transnational currency.
I want to emphasize that there is nothing
fundamentally new here. And I want to
emphasize that modern technologies have
made this much easier. But I think it is
important to clearly assess the problem, make
a correct diagnosis, and prioritize strategy
over tactics. In this way, this path will be
understandable enough. Yes, it will take work,
it will take effort, but we are not going to
reinvent the wheel.
Lastly, I want to make one final point. In
this situation, it is important not to get away
from the fire of one currency and get caught
in the fire of another. This would happen if we
substitute one country’s currency, which is a
reserve currency today, with another country’s
currency. In this case, neither the Triffin
Paradox nor the conflict of interests arising
from problems of a permanent and structural
nature would disappear.
Nevertheless, we must always remember that
human civilization will never lose its ability
for creative development. Not much time
has passed since the ideas of a hundred years
ago; ideas are born, realized and successfully
implemented. We need to be aware of all of this
in principle and, in our opinion, move toward
a logical and efficient clearing system.
New Financial System in the Developing
World for a Fair World
Aleksandr Galushka was also a speaker at the
online workshop titled “The New World in the
Context of Russia’s Operation in Ukraine“,
organized on May 7, 2022, by the New
International Order (NINTO) Initiative, which
was established in 2021 on the initiative of the
Vatan Party (Türkiye) International Relations
Bureau. Dr. Doğu Perinçek, Chairman of the
Vatan Party, was the first speaker at the event,
where 21 representatives of institutions and
intellectualsfromsixcontinentsand19countries
made presentations. Aleksandr Galushka spoke
second after Dr. Perinçek at the workshop and
said the following:
After Russia launched a special military
operation in February 2022, the United States
imposed unprecedented sanctions and froze
Russian reserves—sovereign reserves. Over
time, the need to de-ideologize the world
economy has steadily increased. Essentially,
the dollar has become a weapon, a militarized
world reserve currency. Most importantly,
it has become impossible for the dollar to be
seen as a risk-free asset in the world economic
system, a risk-free means of meeting reserves.
This situation demands a more strategic
approach, historicity and creativity from
countries concerned with real prosperity,
sustainable development and real sovereignty
in the world’s new financial system. This
system will ensure fair and participatory
relations between all countries, serving the
prosperity and development of all countries
without allowing any country to become a
parasite in the future.
CONFERENCE SPEECH
