Director of Geopolitical Economy Research Group
Prof. Dr. Radhika Desai
Dr. Radhika Desai is Professor at the Department of Political Studies, and Director, Geopolitical
Economy Research Group, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. She is the author of
Geopolitical Economy: After US Hegemony, Globalization and Empire (2013), Slouching Towards
Ayodhya: From Congress to Hindutva in Indian Politics (2nd rev ed, 2004) and Intellectuals and
Socialism: ‘Social Democrats’ and the Labour Party (1994), a New Statesman and Society Book of
the Month, and editor or co-editor of Russia, Ukraine and Contemporary Imperialism, a special
issue of International Critical Thought (2016), Theoretical Engagements in Geopolitical Economy
(2015), Analytical Gains from Geopolitical Economy (2015), Revitalizing Marxist Theory for
Today’s Capitalism (2010) and Developmental and Cultural Nationalisms (2009). She is also the
author of numerous articles in Economic and Political Weekly, International Critical Thought,
New Left Review, Third World Quarterly, World Review of Political Economy and other journals
and in edited collections on parties, political economy, culture and nationalism. With Alan
Freeman, she co-edits the Geopolitical Economy book series with Manchester University Press
and the Future of Capitalism book series with Pluto Press. She serves on the Editorial Boards
of many journals including Canadian Political Science Review, Critique of Political Economy,
E-Social Sciences, Pacific Affairs, Global Faultlines, Research in Political Economy, Revista de
Economía Crítica, World Review of Political Economy and International Critical Thought.
INTERVIEW
How to cite: Desai, R. (2023). Systematizing Alternative Financial Cooperation is the Key to the Solution.
(Efe Can Gürcan, Interviewer). BRIQ Belt & Road Initiative Quarterly, 5(1), 30-39.
“Systematizing Alternative Financial
Cooperation is the Key to the Solution”
31
31
What has been the global economic impact of US
financial dominance?
Prof. Dr. Radhika Desai: At the Bretton Wo-
ods conference in 1944 on how the post-war world
would be governed, the US blocked Keynes’s pro-
posals for a new international monetary system.
They were to replace the disorder that followed the
breakdown of the sterling system and the vain at-
tempts by the US to enthrone the dollar after the
First World War. Since then, the US has subjected
the world to its unstable, unviable dollar system.
This is not widely understood because there
is an entire cottage industry of academics, based
overwhelmingly in the United States, who have
been working in overdrive for decades trying to
naturalize the idea that the currency of the world’s
most powerful country is naturally the currency of
the world. Nothing could be further from the truth.
The theory of US hegemony, which claims that the
US dollar is only the successor to the pound ster-
ling, is based on the wishful thinking that US elites
have been indulging in for more than a century.
The theory of US hegemony is nothing more then
some ill-fitting theoretical garb that these academics
have thrown onto this wishful thinking.
Dr. Radhika Desai, Professor at the Department of Political Studies and Director,
Geopolitical Economy Research Group, University of Manitoba, answered BRIQ Editorial
Board Coordinator Assoc. Prof. Dr. Efe Can Gürcan’s questions.
INTERVIEW
“It’sbesttothinkaboutthedollarizationintermsoftwodistinctbutrelatedprocesses.
The first is the mounting contradictions of the dollar system itself. The second is the
increasing availability of alternatives. The proliferation of these alternatives is not
systematicithasacertainadhoccharacteranditwillretainthischaracteruntilasizable
numberofcountriesareabletocomeupwithaplanforalternativeunifiedinternational
monetary arrangements. This is necessary because the ad hoc arrangements being
made today are not systematic or complete solutions. So a systematic solution is
necessary and this will only come into being when a sufficiently large number of
countriesrepresentingasufficientlylargepartoftheworldeconomycanmutuallyagree
tocreateone.AnotherimportantoptiontoU.S.financialdominanceistocreateastrong
financialsectorathomethatisnotrelentonforeigncapital.Suchafinancialsectormust
beorientedtowardsproductiveinvestmentincludinginvestmentinthosesectorswhich
have the greatest possibility for being competitive on export markets. Not only will
expanding productive capacity increase the possibilities of international cooperation
among countries that are increasingly dealing with one another on a more and more
equal basis because the spread of multipolarity will reduce the power differentials
amongcountries,itwillalsomakeallsortsoffinancialcooperationpossible.”
32
32
The pound sterling was not a national but an
imperial currency. Even then it served neither
the UK nor the world well. It was founded on
the exploitation of the UK’s non-settler colo-
nies, chiefly British India, the largest of them
the so-called ‘Jewel in the Crown’, encompassing
present day India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, so
that the UK could provide liquidity to the world
in the form of the capital exports. These capital
exports financed the industrialization of Europe,
the US and Britain’s other white settler colonies
during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In
other words, the sterling system was founded on
racist imperialism.
After the Second World War, without such co-
lonies the US could only provide the world with
liquidity by running deficits, paying for the excess
it spent in the world over what it earned by han-
ding out dollars which were essentially IOUs. This
method of providing liquidity that was subject to
the famous Triffin Dilemma: the greater the defi-
cits the lower the value of the dollar.
The first version of the dollar system, where the
US promised to back the dollar with gold in order
to sweeten the bitter pill it was asking the world
to swallow when it rejected Keynes’s proposals
and left the world with no alternative to the dollar,
came to a bad end. The rest of the world, chief-
ly Europe which was then the part of the world
which was forced to hold their export surpluses
in devalued dollars, preferred gold. Their demand
for gold drained the vast hoard that had ended up
in the US during the wars and, after spending the
1960s trying one expedient after another to keep
the dollar’s gold backing, the US had to ‘close the
gold window’ and break the dollar’s link with gold.
Contrary to what the doyens of so-called He-
gemony Stability Theory argue, this did not make
the Triffin Dilemma go away, leaving the US free
of the obligation to convert dollars into gold with
no effect on the dollar system. The Triffin Dilem-
ma continued to operate, sending the dollar to
new lows in the 1970s where at one point, the dol-
lar price of gold reached more than $800 per oun-
ce, which would be over $3000 in today’s money.
Since then, the dollar system has relied on vast
expansions of purely financial activity, financial
activity that has no relation to and does not sup-
port the investment and trade necessary for the
world economy, but rather undermines it. This is
the most fundamental reason why the economic
impact of the dollar system and of U.S. financial
dominance has been and will remain negative.
The system, which Michael Hudson and I have
called the dollar creditocracy, relies on debt, spe-
culation and imbalances and is volatile and uns-
table. Let us look at some of the main effects.
Firstly, it has created a vast amount of debt,
primarily dollar-denominated debt, which consti-
tutes the foundation upon which the dollar credi-
tocracy operates. The result is over indebted hou-
seholds, businesses, and governments. This debt is
far beyond the capacity of these entities to pay and
is therefore unsustainable. Worse, not only has it
been lent without due assessment of the capacity
of the borrower to pay, it has mostly been lent for
unproductive purposes, often for speculation.
These purposes benefit only the tiny number of
already very large financial institutions and the
INTERVIEW
In the first version of the
dollar system, US promised
to back the dollar with gold
in order to sweeten the
bitter pill.
33
33
equally small number of owners who are high net
worth individuals. Of course, most of the debt is
also owed to this group.
Secondly the system relies on speculation. The
existence of this financial system tends to draw
money away from productive investment and
towards financial investment. Inevitably, it leads
do asset bubbles, increases in the prices of assets,
whether they are stocks and bonds, real estate,
fine wines or pictures, you name it. These values
have nothing to do with the intrinsic worth of
these assets and everything to do with the sheer
amount of money seeking returns that is sloshing
about the system. These asset bubbles – think of
the dot-com bubble, the various stock market
bubbles the housing and credit bubble in the Uni-
ted States, and the so-called everything bubble to-
day – inevitably burst causing untold economic
harm, economic crises, unemployment, hunger,
homelessness, poverty.
Thirdly, in order to function, the dollar system
relies on imbalances. This is a very important po-
int. The proposals with which Keynes had arrived
at Bretton woods, for an mutually agreed and mul-
tilaterally managed International Clearing Union
which would issue Bancor as the world’s currency,
were very different. Bancor was not to be a cur-
rency that ordinary people would use, say to buy a
meal or a t-shirt. It was to be reserved exclusively
for central banks to settle their imbalances with
one another much as clearing houses do for banks
within a country. The people of various countries
could continue using their national currencies
for most transactions as before.
INTERVIEW
The existence of this financial system tends to draw money away from productive investment and towards financial
investment. Inevitably, it leads do asset bubbles, increases in the prices of assets, whether they are stocks and bonds,
real estate, fine wines or pictures (Photo: China Daily, 2021).
34
34
Keynes’s system was also designed to reduce im-
balances to a minimum, with incentives and disin-
centives built into the system to prevent persistent
imbalances and to promote balanced trade and in-
vestment relations. The dollar system on the other
hand, reliant as it is on US current account deficits,
has the expansion of imbalances written into the core
of the system and, in order to deal with the inevitable
downward pressure on the dollar, it then requires the
vast expansion of dollar-denominated financial acti-
vity to seek to stabilize it.
These imbalances and this expansion of financial
activity have been extremely harmful for the world.
Firstly, they permit the maintenance of a system in
which some countries run persistent trade surpluses
while other countries run persistent trade deficits
and this problem never has to be resolved because
the vast expansion of financial activity means that
deficit countries can indebt to pay for the deficits.
This is true, of course, of the United States. But it
also means that developing countries continue to fail
at development and remain in positions of running
persistent trade deficits which then get them into
debt and the whole cycle of debt and economic and
financial crisis that inevitably results from the cur-
rent system. It also gives the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank their chance to impose
‘Structural Adjustment’ on these countries and its
effect has always been to further set back develop-
ment and subordinate them further to the imperia-
list countries.
Another problem with the dollar system is of
course its current weaponization. When you have
the currency of a single country being used as the
currency of the world that country can always use
the system to inflict punishment on those it consi-
ders its enemies. While the recent sequestering of
Russian reserves shocked the world, many other
countries have previously been the victims of such
behaviour, such as Afghanistan Iran and Venezuela.
This weaponization has underlined the unsatisfac-
tory nature of the dollar system.
Finally, we can say in conclusion, at the dollar sys-
tem has subjected the world to slow growth, lack of
development and repeated crises.
The driving force of de-dollarization
How is the phenomenon of “de-dollarization” cur-
rently unfolding? What factors are propelling this
ongoing shift, and what is its driving force?
Prof. Dr. Radhika Desai: The most fundamental
driving force of de-dollarization is that the world is not,
and cannot be, satisfied with the way in which the dollar
system serves it. As long as I can remember, complaints
about its functioning, whether in the context of the third
world debt crisis of the 1980s or the imbalances of the
1990s and 2000s, have regularly appeared in the press
andinacademicjournals.Today,ofcourse,thereismuch
morediscussionofthisanditsuggeststhatthelong-awai-
ted demise of the dollar system is rapidly approaching.
It’s best to think about the dollarization in terms of two
distinct but related processes. The first is the mounting
contradictions of the dollar system itself. The second is
the increasing availability of alternatives.
Since the Triffin Dilemma never went away, today
sustainingthevalueofthedollarrequiresvastexpansions
of financial activity. Only it can ensure that the resulting
increased demand for the dollar for purely financial and
speculativereasonscancounteractthedownwardpressu-
reonthedollarthatthesorrystateoftheUSeconomy,it’s
trade deficit and current account deficit put on the dollar.
One might add here that the expansion of financial acti-
vity has been intimately tied up with the deindustrializa-
tion that the US has suffered over the past many decades.
INTERVIEW
35
35
Over the last two decades this increased financial de-
mand has been created by policies of easy money. The
low and zero interest rate policies (LIRP and ZIRP), qu-
antitative easing (QE), forward guidance and what have
you. This era of low interest rates originally began in the
2000s in the aftermath of the bursting of the.com bubble
whentheFederalReserveunderAlanGreenspan,realizi-
ng that the housing bubble that had been gestating at the
same time as the stock market bubble was the only thing
keeping the US economy going and keeping it going
required low interest rate policies. This era of low interest
rates was interrupted when rate rises became necessary
about 2004 in 2005 because the dollar was declining too
rapidly. These rate rises eventually burst the housing and
creditbubblesin2008.Thereafter,theFederalReservere-
turned to the low and even zero interest rates, Ostensibly
in all in order to do stimulate the economy but in reality
in order to aid troubled financial institutions. The result
wasofcoursetheinflationofevermoreassetbubblesthat
have resulted in today’s everything bubble.
Through the 2010s these policies coexisted with low
inflation because the US continued to receive cheap im-
ports from abroad through what we may call unequal
exchange, and domestically kept wages down. Both these
conditions ceased to obtain after the pandemic and infla-
tion now returned with a vengeance.
The return of inflation has put the Federal Reserve in
a dilemma. If it tackles inflation in the only way it can, by
raising interest rates, it will burst the so-called everything
bubble which has inflated the prices of practically every
asset in the system, not to mention inflated the wealth of
those who invest in these. One should clarify here that
while the Federal Reserve can only deal with inflation
by raising interest rates, this is not the only way to tac-
kle inflation. The most sensible way to tackle inflation,
the only way which does not come with economic pain
being inflicted on ordinary working people, is to increa-
se investment and resolve the supply issues that lie at the
root of inflation. But this cannot be done by the Federal
Reserve. Since the lack of private investment and activity
is what lies at the root of the problem, it can only be sol-
ved by state intervention on a fairly massive and perva-
sive scale, by the state stepping in to do what the private
sector cannot or will not do, namely invest and produce.
Of course, this is loathed by neoliberals and capitalists. If
they were to permit it, the public would see clearly that
they are quite dispensable. That there is no need to put
up with capitalism, and this would open the road to so-
cialism. That is why they keep repeating that ‘inflation is
always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon’. So the
Federal Reserve only permits itself the method of raising
interest rates to tackle inflation even though it causes re-
cessionandunemployment.Indeed,todayitisclearfrom
the discourse emanating from the Federal Reserve that
it would like to generate just enough unemployment to
killinflationbykillingdemand,thedemandofthepeople
sufferingfromunemployment,whilenotcausingareces-
sion. Though it does not say so, of course, the Federal
Reserve is also worried that rising interest rates will prick
the many asset bubbles that have inflated over the past
decade and a half. This would hurt the very people that
the Federal Reserve exists to serve. If it raises rates, there
will be a big financial crash. If it does not, inflation will
persist, and undermine the dollar. Either way the dollar
is in trouble.
INTERVIEW
Themostsensiblewaytotackle
inflation,theonlywaywhichdoes
notcomewitheconomicpain
beinginflictedonordinaryworking
people,istoincreaseinvestment
andresolvethesupplyissuesthat
lieattherootofinflation.
36
The second reason why de-dollarization is accelera-
ting is because of the increasing availability of alternati-
ves. On the one hand, China is today the most impor-
tant trading partner for more than 150 countries, and
it is also increasingly a source of investment. This can
only mean a rising role for the yuan and other curren-
cies in payment systems. On the other hand, witness to
the weaponization of the dollar and the SWIFT system
of international payments against Russia, the world has
increasingly sought alternatives. These alternatives have
taken many forms. There are alternative payment sys-
tems which various countries whether it is Russia or
India or China are increasingly establishing. The availa-
bility of digital technology has also made this easier and
more and more countries are also talking about creating
central bank digital currencies (CBDCs). Secondly, they
have taken the form of agreements between countries
to settle trade among themselves in one another’s cur-
rencies. Alternatives have also emerged in the form of
new sources of finance particularly coming from China
in the form of the Belt and Road Initiative, the Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank and more generally the
vast amount of lending Chinese banks are undertaking
to finance investment abroad.
The proliferation of these alternatives is not systema-
tic it has a certain ad hoc character and it will retain this
character until a sizable number of countries are able to
come up with a plan for alternative unified internatio-
nal monetary arrangements. This is necessary becau-
se the ad hoc arrangements being made today are not
systematic or complete solutions. Take for example the
agreement to settle trade between two countries in one
another’s currency. This can only work if both countries
wish to buy roughly equal amounts of goods from one
another. However, this is not always the case. For exam-
ple, in the case of Russia and India settling trade in rupe-
es in rubles. The problem has emerged that while India
imports large amounts of Russian oil, which it pays for
in rupees, Russia is left holding a vast pile of rupees and
very little that it can buy from India. Such imbalances
mean that the arrangement is unsustainable and will li-
kely have to end.
So a systematic solution is necessary and this will
only come into being when a sufficiently large number
of countries representing a sufficiently large part of the
world economy can mutually agree to create one. And
hereIwouldlike to makean important caveat.Therehas
been a lot of talk recently about the five Rs.
INTERVIEW
President of Brazil Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, President of China Xi Jinping, President of South Africa Cyril
Ramaphosa, Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi and Foreign Minister of Russia Sergei Lavrov are at the
15th BRICS Summit (Photo: Xinhua, 2023).
37
The BRICS countries all of whose currencies have
names beginning with R – real, ruble, rupee, renminbi
and rand. The idea is that they will create some sort of
international currency for use amongst themselves.
However, it is very important to remember that any
international currency that is created should not be a
currency that will either displace or be used alongside
national currencies by ordinary people going about the-
ir daily business to buy say a restaurant meal or a toy.
Creating such a currency would be quite harmful to
those with weaker economies as the experience of the
euro has already shown. That is why it’s important to re-
member Keynes’s original proposals at Bretton woods.
They did not involve this sort of currency but rather a
currency that would be used exclusively among central
banks to settle imbalances with one another. All the
countries concerned would continue to use their do-
mestic currencies for all domestic transactions. If the
world wants to create an International Monetary Order
that is conducive to growth and development, it will
have to be something like this.
The first condition for a development-
oriented financial system is capital control
Are there feasible options to counterbalance US
financial dominance? What key opportunities and
obstacles arise with the emergence of these new
alternatives?
Prof. Dr. Radhika Desai: I’ve already answered
this question partly in my answer to the previous
question but let me elaborate a little. There are in fact
many feasible options to counterbalance U S financial
dominance. First of all, every country needs to take
greater control over its financial sector, and not give
to siren calls emanating chiefly from New York and
Washington, to lift capital controls, to permit wes-
tern financial institutions too operate in their finan-
cial sector and to issue government debt in dollars.
These measures only turn the financial systems of
these countries into props for the unstable and vola-
tile dollar system that we have already described. Not
only does it do nothing for the development of the
country concerned, it is positively harmful for develo-
pment. The chief reason for it is that the development
of a country needs a financial sector that is regulated
in a way that orients it to productive investment. The
insertion of a country’s financial system into the dol-
lar system, transforming it into a financial system that
is oriented instead to speculation and predatory len-
ding.
The first step towards creating a financial system
geared to the development of a country is to impose
capital controls. The United States, the IMF and more
generally the neoliberal establishment have for de-
cades tried to entice countries to lift capital controls
on the grounds that doing so will bring much needed
productive investment to their country. However, as
so many of the East Asian countries discovered in the
late 1990s, when they lifted capital controls money
did flow in, but it was not money or capital for pro-
ductive investment. It was rather hot money seeking
short term returns by speculating in the land, stocks
and other asset markets of the countries concerned.
Moreover with open capital accounts, this money was
free to stampede in when, without knowing much
about the economies of the countries concerned, they
became irrationally exuberant about the prospects of
short term returns, and it was also free to stampede
out when, overnight, based on little but rumor, the
very people who had been praising that country’s
sound fundamentals start talking about its problems.
Such outflows of money, entirely unrelated to any real
developments in the economy, were responsible for
causing the massive East Asian financial crisis which
hit some of the most productive and dynamic part of
the world economy in 1997 and 1998.
INTERVIEW
38
The crisis was, of course, blamed by the neo liberals
on the so-called crony capitalism of these countries when
in reality the chief culprit was the very dollar denomina-
ted financial system to which these countries had opened
themselves up by lifting capital controls. It is noteworthy
that countries such as Vietnam or India did not expe-
rience this financial crisis for the simple reason that they
had never lifted capital controls.
Capital controls must ensure that any capital entering
the economy enters to make productive investment and
demonstrates a degree of commitment to the country’s
economy by agreeing to forsake the right to repatriate ca-
pital or profits except on certain strict conditions.
Another important option to U.S. financial domi-
nanceistocreateastrongfinancialsectorathomethatis
notrelentonforeigncapital.Suchafinancialsectormust
be oriented towards productive investment including in-
vestment in those sectors which have the greatest possi-
bility for being competitive on export markets. Having
some such sectors is very critical to relieving countries of
thenecessitytoborrowindollarsorotherhardcurrencies
because that country would be capable of earning throu-
gh exports what it needs to purchase from abroad, that is,
the imports it relies on .
Thirdly, a very very important option that countries
must learn to start exercising is not permitting the private
sector to borrow money abroad in hard currency, or at
least regulating its ability to do so with a view to prioriti-
zing the developmental needs of the country rather than
thetasteforluxuriesoffsmallsectionsoftheSuperrichor
the desire of domestic capitalists to acquire assets abroad.
Finally, governments must not borrow money by is-
suing bonds in any other currency but their own. And
they must also look into the possibility that rather than
borrowing from financial markets it can raise money
through taxation of the better off which also has an equa-
lizing effect on society, or borrowing from its own central
bank.Thispreventsthesortoffinancialcrisesthatresults,
almost inevitably, when interest rates rise internationally.
China’s difference and the enormous
impact of the BRI
How does multipolarity influence international
financial cooperation? What role does China play
in providing alternative solutions in this context?
Prof. Dr. Radhika Desai: Multipolarity can have
beneficial effects on development in general and non
financial cooperation in particular. As I have analyzed
it in my work on geopolitical economy, multipolari-
ty is the result of the working of the dialectic of what
Trotsky called uneven and combined development and
what we may understand as the dialectic of imperia-
lism and anti imperialism. What is imperialism but the
denial of development? And what is anti imperialism
but the successful assertion of the right to develop-
ment, the successful pursuit of development?
Geopolitical economy rests on an accurate under-
standing of Marx’s analysis of capitalism, free of the
distortions that have been introduced because of the
attempt on the part of so many who called themselves
Marxists to try to fit it into the antithetical methodo-
logical and theoretical framework of neoclassical eco-
nomics. When this is done, it becomes clear that for
Marx classes as well as nations were both the material
products of capitalism and that the era of capitalism is
characterised not just by struggles between working and
capitalist classes but also between imperialist countries
and those resisting imperialism. Once this becomes cle-
ar, it is easy to see that the literature on developmental
states is naturally allied with Marxism.
Thus geopolitical economy understandings the
centrality of developmental states in producing deve-
lopment, and traces the origin of this understanding
in Marx. Once this is understood, it becomes clear that
multipolarity is the result of the fact that in the dialec-
tic of imperialism and anti imperialism notwithstan-
ding the power of imperialism, the latter tendency,
INTERVIEW
39
the anti imperialist and developmental tendency, has
prevailed. It is this tendency that has spread productive
power around the world and made it multipolar.
In this dialectic as I have pointed out dominant states
the states of the homelands of capitalism have strived to
maintain the unevenness of capitalist development, that
is to say their privileged position in the international
hierarchy that is the world economy. They have striven
to maintain that position as producers of technologically
sophisticated high value goods while imposing upon the
rest of the world, which they seek to dominate through
formal colonialism or informal means, economic forms
that compliment their sophisticated industrial economies
by producing low technology low value goods with cheap
labour. It is only when countries that are able and willing
to reject such economic subordination and complemen-
tarity by pursuing development through successful deve-
lopmental states that they are able to establish similarity
of productive structures.
The story of the world economy has been one of mul-
tipolarity because a sufficiently large number of countries
has been able to undertake this effort and succeed in it.
Along the way, beginning in the early 20th century, the
pursuitofthistypeofcombineddevelopmenthasalsoin-
cluded The implementation of some of the other version
of socialism beginning with the Russian Revolution and
continuing today in China.
Every advance in the spread of productive power
around the world makes it easier for the next set of coun-
tries to pursue development, accelerating the advance of
multipolarity. This happens because capitalist countries
naturally compete with one another for influence in the
rest of the world and in doing so must offer trade in-
vestment technological transfer and other relations to the
rest of the world on increasingly better terms. It also hap-
pens because some countries who have become socialist
whether the Soviet Union in the past or China today offer
tradeinvestmenttechnologyetcongoodtermstotherest
oftheworldoutofsolidarity.Todaythisprocesshastaken
monumental proportions in the form of China’s Belt and
Road Initiative and more generally China’s investments
around the world, building infrastructure investing in
manufacturing as well as in energy and resources and
offering skills and technology. China’s presence in the rest
oftheworldhasalreadybeingexperiencedasacomplete-
lynovelformoftradeandaidrelationsvastlymorepositi-
ve then the imperial exploitation to which so much of the
third world has been subject until very recently and even
today by the imperialist countries of the world.
Not only will expanding productive capacity increa-
se the possibilities of international cooperation among
countries that are increasingly dealing with one another
on a more and more equal basis because the spread of
multipolarity will reduce the power differentials among
countries, it will also make all sorts of financial coopera-
tion possible. As I’ve already emphasized the most im-
portant form of financial cooperation can be and must
be in the first instance aiding all countries to have finan-
cial sectors geared towards production and cooperating
with them to create an international monetary system
that does not privilege anyone country, that does not
generate persistent imbalances, that is not volatile and
unstable, but which can leave governments free to run
their economies for full employment and development.
Such an international monetary system will probably
not be exactly what Keynes had proposed more than 75
years ago but it will have to be based on the broad prin-
ciples that his proposals were founded on.
INTERVIEW
Geopolitical economy
understandings the centrality
of developmental states in
producing development,
and traces the origin of this
understanding in Marx.
