Perspective Piece

Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa*

Salama Brahim El-Bachir**
Secretary-General of Sahrawi Trade Union (UGTSARIO)

**Salama Brahim El-Bachir is a state engineer specializing in urban planning and development. He
has served in a leadership role in the Sahra Student and Youth Movement. El-Bachir has a long history
of working in the external relations office of the POLISARIO Front. In 2016, he was elected as the
President of the Sahra General Workers’ Union, a position he was re-elected to in 2021. Throughout
his career, he has participated in numerous worker conferences and international seminars. El-Bachir
is recognized as one of the leading members of the Polisario Front.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3755-1135

Received: 5.1.2024
Accepted: 1.2.2024

How to cite: El-Bachir, S. B. (2024). Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa. BRIQ Belt and Road
Initiative Quarterly, 5(2), 172-181.

Salama Brahim El-Bachir - Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa

ABSTRACT
When Morocco violated the 1991 ceasefire on 13 November 2020 after years of obstructing the
referendum on self-determination, the Frente POLISARIO declared that it was forced to exercise its
right to self-defence and that it was consequently resuming the liberation struggle. As a result, the
Territory of Western Sahara has become a zone of open war as military confrontations between the two
parties continue and intensify along the Moroccan illegal military wall in Western Sahara. Morocco’s
violation of the 1991 ceasefire has not only put an end to the UN peace process but also has the potential
to endanger peace and stability in the region. Once again, the UN Security Council has remained
silent in the face of Morocco’s new act of aggression. The question before the international community
and the free world comes down to this: do they allow the logic of force and the rule of “might makes
right” to prevail in North Africa, and thus allow Morocco’s military occupation of parts of Western
Sahara to endure with impunity, or do they defend the principles of international law that are crucial to
maintaining order, credibility and belief in the rules governing international relations, and consequently
allow the Sahrawi people the chance to exercise their right to self-determination and independence
freely and democratically? The only option, therefore, is to defend the principles of international law and
bring the decolonization of Western Sahara to its conclusion through the free, genuine, and democratic
expression of the sovereign will of the Sahrawi people in the exercise of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence.
Keywords: Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, self-determination, Polisario Front, the struggle against
colonialism, Western Sahara.

THE CONFLICT IN WESTERN SAHARA,
the last colony in Africa, has lasted for almost five
decades, and it continues to pose a potential danger
to stability and security in the region of North
Africa. Despite international and African efforts, the
solution to the conflict remains elusive.
Western Sahara is located on the continent’s
Atlantic coast and bordered by Morocco to the
north, Algeria to the northeast and Mauritania to
the east and south. Following the Berlin Conference
of 1884–5, which divided Africa among European
powers, Western Sahara was declared a Spanish
protectorate and became to be known as Spanish
Sahara.
*Sub-headings added by BRIQ.

More than 60 years ago, the United Nations (UN)
recognized the then-Spanish Sahara as a Non-SelfGoverning Territory. The international status of
Western Sahara as a question of decolonization on
the UN agenda since 1963 entails that the people of
the Territory, the Sahrawi people, have an inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 1960. After years of anticolonial nonviolent
resistance against Spanish presence, Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguia el-Hamra y de Río de Oro
(Frente POLISARIO) was created in May 1973 as a
liberation movement representing the Sahrawi people
and their collective will to national independence.
173

B R I q • Volu me 5 Issue 2 Spring 2024

Western Sahara is located on the Atlantic coast of the continent and shares common borders with Morocco to the north,
Algeria to the northeast and Mauritania to the east and south (Map: UN, Western Sahara, 10 May 2022).

As a result of pressure from the UN and the
increased military and political actions of the Frente
POLISARIO, Spain eventually declared its intention
to hold a referendum on self-determination in the
Territory in early 1975. Morocco and Mauritania
immediately objected to the move and requested the
174

arbitration of the International Court of Justice (ICJ)
regarding the pre-colonial status of the Territory. It
is important to note that Morocco had also claimed
Mauritania, part of Mali, a large part of the western
Algerian desert and even a part of Senegal. Morocco’s
territorial claims were inspired by the expansionist

Salama Brahim El-Bachir - Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa

ideology of the so-called “Greater Morocco”, which
was advocated in the late 1950s by Alal al-Fasi, the
leader of the Moroccan ultranationalist Istiqlal party,
shortly after Morocco gained independence from
France in March 1956.
In its historic advisory opinion on Western Sahara,
issued on 16 October 1975, the ICJ, which is the UN’s
principal judicial organ, established very clearly that
there never existed “any tie of territorial sovereignty
between the territory of Western Sahara and the
Kingdom of Morocco or the Mauritanian entity”. It
also endorsed “the decolonization of Western Sahara”
by means of the exercise of “self-determination
through the free and genuine expression of the will of
the peoples of the Territory.”

‘Green March’ and the Moroccan
occupation
Shortly after the release of the ICJ advisory opinion,
King Hassan II of Morocco ordered the so-called
“Green March” of 350,000 Moroccans to “peacefully”
march into the Territory to reclaim it. Furthermore,
by 31 October 1975, Moroccan forces were already
advancing and invading the northern part of Western
Sahara.
The “Green March” was a major event that triggered a set of events that led to the invasion and partition of Western Sahara by Morocco and Mauritania,
following a secret agreement with Spain and the outbreak of the war between the Moroccan-Mauritanian
armies and the forces of the Frente POLISARIO. The
issue was then brought before the Security Council,
the UN’s principal organ with primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. However, the dominant Cold War mindset at the
time prevented the Council from taking any decisive
action against Morocco, which had aligned itself with
the Western block.

In the early seventies, the rule of King Hassan II
of Morocco was facing a serious domestic legitimacy
crisis. By asserting its claim on Western Sahara, King
Hassan II’s tactical move was intended to shift focus
away from domestic dissension and to neutralize the
threat of the army at a time when the popularity of the
Alawite monarchy was at its lowest ebb following two
separate coup attempts against the king in 1971 and
1972. Although the king survived both attempts, the
mounting discontent in the country, particularly amid
the Moroccan military, made the situation even more
difficult for the monarchical regime. In addition to
Morocco’s increased interest in the abundant natural
resources of Western Sahara, particularly phosphate
and fish, as well as the Cold War geopolitical game at
the time, the monarchy’s dire need for an outlet for its
legitimacy crises and growing domestic problems was
the main reason behind Morocco’s move to invade
and occupy Western Sahara in 1975. This is why Western Sahara has become closely linked to the survival
of the monarchy itself.

In the early 1980s, in order to secure
its occupation of about two-thirds
of the Territory, Morocco began
building a 2,700-kilometre heavily
mined wall of sand and stone, which
divides Western Sahara into two and
separates the occupied part from the
rest of the Territory.
Mauritania eventually withdrew from the war in
1979. In the early 1980s, in order to secure its occupation of about two-thirds of the Territory, Morocco began building a 2,700-kilometre heavily mined wall of
sand and stone (the “Berm”), which divides Western
Sahara into two and separates the occupied part from
the rest of the Territory.
175

B R I q • Volu me 5 Issue 2 Spring 2024

Auserd refugee camp on 27 February 2021, 45th anniversary of the declaration of the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic
(Photo: Instagram.com/saharawivoice, 12 November 2021).

The Moroccan occupation of Western Sahara forced a major part of the Sahrawi population to flee the
country and seek protection in southwest Algeria,
where they established their refugee camps near
the town of Tindouf. There are five main refugee
camps (vast tent cities) that are administered by the
authorities of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), which was proclaimed on 27 February 1976 shortly after Spain’s withdrawal from
Western Sahara.
In the territories under Moroccan occupation,
the Sahrawi population has for decades endured
dispossession and repression. As documented by a
host of international and local organizations, many
Sahrawis have been victims of various forms of vi176

olence, mainly for their political activism. Sahrawis
also live predominately in conditions marked by
poverty, high rates of unemployment, marginalization, and deprivation of their basic socioeconomic
and political rights. The Moroccan authorities have
flooded the Territory with thousands of Moroccan
settlers, thus converting the indigenous population into a minority in its own country. Morocco has
also been engaged in a policy of “moroccanization,”
which aims at obliterating or supplanting the Sahrawi
culture and heritage. Moroccan authorities continue
to ban the use of hassaniya, the Sahrawi dialect, or any
display of Sahrawi distinct culture, while encouraging
the use of Moroccan dialects in the education system
and public.

Salama Brahim El-Bachir - Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa

The Settlement Plan
By the late 1980s, the huge war costs incurred by Morocco
made King Hassan II realize the impossibility of imposing
a military victory in Western Sahara. This new situation
gave both the UN and the Organisation of the African
Unity (OAU, currently the African Union) more chances
to intervene to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict. In August 1988, both parties to the conflict, the Frente
POLISARIO and Morocco, accepted a Settlement Plan
(peace plan) proposed jointly by the UN and the OAU
as a roadmap to reach a peaceful solution to the conflict
after 16 years of armed conflict. The plan was approved
by the UN Security Council in 1990 in 1991. The Settlement Plan provided for a ceasefire to be followed by a
free and fair referendum on self-determination to be held
without military or administrative constraints to enable
the people of Western Sahara, in the exercise of their right
to self-determination, to choose between independence
and integration with Morocco. To this end, the Security
Council established under its authority the UN Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) on
29 April 1991. The Mission was deployed in the Territory
to supervise the ceasefire, which came into effect on 6
September 1991, and organize the referendum.

Instead of holding Morocco
accountable for its rejection of the
peace plan that it had already accepted,
the Security Council stood by and
did nothing under the influence of
influential members such as the United
States of America and France.
The peace plan gave rise to many hopes that a final
and lasting solution to this protracted conflict in northwest Africa was finally within reach. However, the

hopes proved short-lived because the referendum on
self-determination, which was scheduled to take place
in February 1992, could not be held because of the many
obstacles put in its way by Morocco. Notwithstanding
the ups and downs, in January 2000, MINURSO was
able to establish the list of eligible voters for the referendum, thus paving the way for the vote to take place.
It was precisely at that moment that Morocco declared
that it was no longer willing to proceed with the referendum on self-determination, obviously for fear of losing
at the ballot box. Morocco’s sudden change of heart was
due to its realization that in a free, democratic referendum based on the UN-established voter list, the people
of Western Sahara would clearly choose the independence option. Instead of holding Morocco accountable
for its rejection of the peace plan that it had already accepted, the Security Council stood by and did nothing
under the influence of influential members such as the
United States of America and France.
All UN relevant resolutions and legal doctrine, including the ICJ advisory opinion on Western Sahara of
1975, affirm that the essence of the right of colonial peoples to self-determination is a democratic process by
which the will of the people concerned is expressed in
an informed, free, and genuine manner. This means that
the will of the people of Western Sahara, the sole holder
of the right to self-determination, must be expressed without any foreign interference of any kind. The expression
must also be genuine and direct through the internationally established democratic processes of which the referendum is a widely used process as, for instance, was
shown by the case of East Timor, which had many similarities with the Western Sahara situation. The Security
Council’s self-contradictory approach to self-determination remains the underlying cause of the impasse currently facing the UN peace process in Western Sahara.
This situation is compounded by the fact that the UN has
remained silent in the face of Morocco’s recent violation
of the 1991 ceasefire on 13 November 2020.
177

B R I q • Volu me 5 Issue 2 Spring 2024

The seriousness of the situation is further aggravated by the fact that the Security Council, because of its own power dynamics, has been pursuing a
passive, ambivalent and predominantly “hands-off
approach” to its management of the UN peace process in Western Sahara. This approach has further
exacerbated the conflict situation and hampered
the quest for a peaceful and enduring solution. The
“hands-off approach” has also emboldened Morocco to persist, with complete impunity, in its attempts
to impose by force a fait accompli in Western Sahara
through a series of actions that aim to normalize and
consolidate its occupation of parts of the Territory.

These include, for example, changing the demographic nature of the Territory through intensified
settlement policies, opening “consulates” of foreign
entities, and organizing elections and international
conferences in the Territory, among others.

Frente POLISARIO and the Resumption of
the Liberation Struggle
When Morocco violated the 1991 ceasefire on 13
November 2020 after years of obstructing the referendum on self-determination, the Frente POLISARIO declared that it was forced to exercise its right

After Morocco violated the 1991 ceasefire on 13 November 2020 and blocked a referendum on selfdetermination for years, Frente POLISARIO announced that it was forced to exercise its right to self-defence
and therefore resumed its liberation struggle (Photo: 10 April 2022, Twitter.com/polisario_)

178

Salama Brahim El-Bachir - Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa

to self-defence and that it was consequently resuming the liberation struggle. As a result, the Territory of Western Sahara has become a zone of open
war as military confrontations between the two
parties continue and intensify along the Moroccan
illegal military wall in Western Sahara. Morocco’s
violation of the 1991 ceasefire has not only put an
end to the UN peace process but also has the potential to endanger peace and stability in the region.
Once again, the UN Security Council has remained
silent in the face of Morocco’s new act of aggression.

No genuine and credible exercise
of the right to self-determination
in the case of Western Sahara can
be envisaged without the Sahrawi
people, and only the Sahrawi
people, making a free choice to
determine their political status
under the optimal conditions of
freedom, fairness, and transparency
and without any military or
administrative constraints.
The solution to the question of Western Sahara is
clearly defined in successive UN General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. The resolutions
call for a peaceful, just, and lasting solution that
provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara. In this sense, no genuine and credible exercise of the right to self-determination in
the case of Western Sahara can be envisaged without the Sahrawi people, and only the Sahrawi people, making a free choice to determine their political status under the optimal conditions of freedom,
fairness, and transparency and without any military

or administrative constraints. Any approach or formula that would undermine the free choice of the
people of Western Sahara or predetermine the outcome of their choice or limit the options available
to them would thus be inconsistent with the right
of self-determination under international law and
relevant UN resolutions.
The international nature of Western Sahara as a
decolonization issue on the agenda of the UN since
1963 is indisputable. Therefore, the question before the international community and the free world comes down to this: do they allow the logic of
force and the rule of “might makes right” to prevail
in North Africa, and thus allow Morocco’s military
occupation of parts of Western Sahara to endure
with impunity, or do they defend the principles of
international law that are crucial to maintaining
order, credibility and belief in the rules governing
international relations, and consequently allow the
Sahrawi people the chance to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence freely and
democratically?
In a rules-based international order, the answer
should be very clear, because the logic of force
cannot be an option. As observed by several commentators, Morocco’s occupation of Western Sahara stands out as one of the most blatant attempts
by a state to expand its territory by force since the
end of World War II. The only option, therefore, is
to defend the principles of international law and
bring the decolonization of Western Sahara to its
conclusion through the free, genuine, and democratic expression of the sovereign will of the Sahrawi
people in the exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence. After all, the
right to self-determination, in essence, is about the
people concerned making a choice, not about someone else making that choice for them.

179

B R I q • Volu me 5 Issue 2 Spring 2024

Demonstration in solidarity with Sultana Khaya under house arrest in occupied Bojdour, Western Sahara
(Photo: Instagram.com/saharawivoice, 20 November 2021).

Information about Western Sahara
The Western Sahara is located in the northwest of
the African continent, between the Atlantic Ocean
and the Sahara Desert, with Morocco to the north,
Mauritania to the south, the Atlantic Ocean to the
west, and Algeria to the east. With a surface area of
266,000 km2 and a population of 603,253, Western
Sahara is bordered by Algeria for 41 km, Mauritania for 1564 km, and Morocco for 444 km out of
its 2049 km border. Its 1110-km coastline with the
Atlantic Ocean makes this country even more geopolitically important.
Ethnically, the people living in Western Sahara
are called Sahrawis. Sahrawi society identifies itself

180

as Muslim and Arab.
Western Sahara, a Portuguese colony for two
hundred years, was one of the first areas of conflict
between the British, French, and Spanish colonizers
in the history of European colonialism. The Spaniards were the victors in the rivalry between the
Western colonizers. After the 1884 Berlin Conference, Spain transformed its colonial rule over the
region into a legal structure. Morocco, on the other
hand, came under French colonization.
After the Second World War, the struggle for
independence began to rise in Western Sahara and
Morocco, as it did throughout Africa. The Spanish
and French colonizers suppressed these struggles
with bloodshed. This suppression united the

Salama Brahim El-Bachir - Western Sahara: The Last Colony in Africa

Moroccan and Western Saharan independence and
freedom movements. On November 16, 1965, the
UN, in its Resolution 2072, called on the Spanish
government to abide by the “Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples” No. 1514, adopted on November
14, 1960, for the Spanish Sahara. The resolution
called on the Spanish government to urgently
implement the right to self-determination in the
region and to do so through the UN. These calls
by the UN encouraged nationalist movements in
Western Sahara, and the Tahrir Movement, led
by Mohammed Bassiri, was founded in 1967 to
demand the independence of the region. Three
years later, the Spanish executed the leader of the
Tahrir Movement, Mohamed Sidi Ibrahim Bassiri.

POLISARIO Front and the Sahrawi Arab
Democratic Republic
In 1972, the discovery of rich phosphate deposits
in the city of Bukra in the east of the country whetted
the appetites of Morocco, Mauritania, and Spain,
which also claimed the region, and Algeria and Libya
joined the process. Founded in 1973, the Polisario
Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of the Red
River and the Golden Valley) also launched a struggle
for independence against Spain.
Spain transferred administrative responsibility for
Western Sahara to Morocco and Mauritania in the
Treaty of Madrid of 1975. The region was divided
between Morocco and Mauritania. After Spain
withdrew, the United States supported Morocco’s
occupation of Western Sahara, providing intelligence

and arms. The first international reaction came from
Algeria. Stating that the treaty would destabilize the
region, Algeria announced that it would increase its
support for the Polisario.
In 1976, Spain, which entered a new era with
the death of Franco, informed the UN that it was
withdrawing from Western Sahara and that the issue
was completely closed for them. Following Spain’s
withdrawal from Western Sahara, the Polisario
Front announced the creation of the Sahrawi Arab
Democratic Republic (SADC) on February 27,
1976. Mauritania reached an agreement with the
SADC and withdrew from the region in 1979.
Morocco occupied the southern region, from which
Mauritania withdrew.
While the conflicts with Morocco continued,
the SADC government made a new political move
on July 16, 1980, and applied for full membership
in the Organization for African Cooperation
(OAU). Despite Morocco’s opposition, the SADC
government was recognized and approved to join
the OAU as a sovereign state. Two years later, in
1984, Morocco announced that it was suspending its
membership.
By 2016, the number of countries recognizing
Western Sahara had reached 85. More than 30 of
these countries were in Africa. Apart from Syria
and Yemen, no Arab country or any of the five
permanent members of the UN Security Council
had recognized Western Sahara. Later, as a
result of diplomatic moves by the Kingdom of
Morocco, 37 countries reversed their decision to
recognize Western Sahara, bringing the number
of recognizing countries down to 48.

181

