395
Disparities in the economic development levels
and differing political landscapes between the mem-
ber states influence the understanding of national
interest in individual member states. Past and future
inconsistencies between member states, Uzbekis-
tan vs. Kirgizstan, and Kirgizstan vs. Tajikistan—a
non-member state—are significant political issues
that should be solved within the OTS. This situation
may complicate collective decision-making, which
could slow down effective cooperation. Over time,
decisive behaviours of the OTS states’ consent lea-
derships may overcome those challenges.
The OTS is a young intergovernmental organi-
zation that must enjoy more international political
recognition. Hungary’s inclusion into the OTS with
observer status is an opening to a region outside
Central Asia and the Caucasus. Although Hunga-
rian membership was considered very unusual by
Europeans who were not familiar with the ethnic
identity of Hungarians, it should be seen as a sig-
nificant achievement for the OTS’s expanding to
EU-region. However, it does not change that this
development has not yet been subjected to an inter-
national organization, which is broadly perceived as
an efficient actor.
The late joining of Turkmenistan only with ob-
server status was a concern for the institutional
development of the OTS. Turkmenistan’s posture
in this respect was initially justified by its political
neutrality. Turkmenistan should not be part of any
alliance and keep its impartial foreign policy. Any-
how, this policy was modified in the 2021 Summit
in Istanbul, and Turkmenistan joined the OTS as an
observer state.
The rivalries and conflicts of interest of glo-
bal powers in different regions currently oversha-
dow the strategic position and power of the OTS.
However, this situation will likely change within the
US-China and Russian relations framework. The-
refore, it may not be surprising to see the OTS in
different roles in the future. The power vacuum that
was predominant in the aftermath of the dissolution
of the Soviet Union could be filled with the OTS and
its member states as a pivotal geopolitical player in
the region. In this respect, emphasis should be put
on deeper strategic cooperation of a political nature
beyond economy and culture. Security and military
cooperation could pave the path for an efficient stra-
tegic alliance. However, there is still a long way to go.
Türkiye’s Possible Role in the Future
Türkiye is aware of its geopolitical role and reflects
it in its diplomatic doctrine marked by geopolitical
realism (Dönmez, 2024: 256-259). Türkiye took the
lead in the formation of the OTS. Newly indepen-
dent Turkic states joined the former Turkic Council,
which was renamed OTS under the informal lea-
dership of Türkiye. Türkiye, as the most developed
country in the Turkic world, displayed a decisive will
to reach greater unity in the Turkic world. The Turkic
World Vision 2040 document outlines this political
will, particularly in cooperation fields like security,
military, economy, trade, culture, education and stra-
tegic partnership. The sensitive geopolitical situation
in the region compels the OTS to be a one-of-a-kind
Organization, taking the competing interests of ot-
her actors into account, both regional and global.
Navigating these tensions and ensuring that the OTS
can effectively promote its agenda without alienating
other influential players in the region is a significant
objective of the OTS at the highest level. In consen-
sus with the member states, Turkish diplomacy pays
attention to delicate relations in the region.
Türkiye’s leading role certainly does not aim to
establish hegemony over the member states of the
OTS. The responsible political figures of Turkish
diplomacy have repeatedly revealed this stand.
Osman Can Ünver - Organization of Turkic States in the Context of New Asian Geopolitics
B R I q • Volume 5 Issue 4 Autumn 2024
396
There is no doubt among the member states that the
joint working methods and aims of the OTS should
enhance internal unity. Leader summits and the clo-
se interaction of different ministerial-level technical
committees at all levels promote and encourage the
OTS and its member states. Those activities constru-
ct a proper leverage for the effectiveness of the OTS.
With the OTS, member and observer states started to
demonstrate a collective identity conducive to solving
various intra-group problems. Türkiye has always tried
to defuse these problems. The solidarity of member
states in the Karabagh conflict and the riots in Ka-
zakhstan (2022) demonstrates the common will and
the shared position of the OTS in general.
Conclusion
Political geography today remains a critical conside-
ration in international affairs. New technological im-
provements have broadened the geopolitics from lands
and seas to air space and cyber world. Nonetheless,
geographic location is still the primary asset of a nati-
on. Robin Niblett states in his recent book that, in the
light of the “New Cold War”, the ideological division
between the West and China is geopolitical and ideo-
logical simultaneously (Niblett, 2024:163). The level of
ideological clash, whether it can endure in the shadow
of changing geostrategic interests, is currently challen-
ging to envisage.
The Organization’s mission is to promote compre-
hensive cooperation among Turkic-speaking countries
in various fields, including politics, economics, cul-
ture, education, and more. Among others, the list of
cooperation contains expanding free trade agreements
among member states that can boost economic coope-
ration and increase intra-regional trade. Furthermore,
investing in transnational infrastructure projects like
transportation networks, energy pipelines, and digital
connectivity will enhance the region’s development.
Joint business ventures and cross-border investments
A frame from the construction phase of the Zengezur Corridor, an important initiative for transportation between
Turkic States (Photo: Aayda, 2022).
397
in crucial sectors such as energy, tourism and agricul-
ture will contribute to the principal establishment aims
of the OTS.
Collective security measures and defence coopera-
tion to ensure regional stability are anticipated in the
context of political and diplomatic cooperation. Fo-
reign policy stances on international issues to incre-
ase diplomatic influence are also on the agenda of the
OTS. The Organization should play a proactive role in
mediating and solving regional conflicts.
Promoting cultural heritage and implementing
education measures should serve as a unified cultural
basis for the Turkic world. The OTS’s major task since
the very beginning has always been introducing cul-
ture-based projects. In this respect, transitioning from
the Cyrillian alphabet to the Latin alphabet and foste-
ring the Turkish language have been priorities.
Further activities focus on technological and scien-
tific cooperation, environment, expansion and inclu-
sion of new members, healthcare, human assistance,
social welfare programs and tourism. The success of
these initiatives will depend on the commitment of
the member states to work together, allocate resources,
and navigate the complexities of regional and global
politics. All these initiatives can contribute to the geo-
political power of the member states of the OTS.
One of the significant questions of the geopoliti-
cal weight of the OTS in the future can be tested in
its relations with major world powers like China and
Russia. Whether the OTS can counterbalance through
its region-based cooperation in every possible field re-
mains to be observed. Rapid changes in global political
conflict-oriented behaviours, emerging conflict sour-
ces, recently in the Middle East and western Eurasia,
and an upcoming clash between China and Taiwan
make almost every part of the world anxious. Central
Asia’s transition from a power vacuum to a more ba-
lanced regional relation must be evaluated as an asset.
The OTS endeavours to establish a region labelled with
its serenity, serving Central Asia and our globe that is
tired of conflicts.
Establishing OTS has been an assertive underta-
king, especially as an initiative driven by Türkiye. Du-
ring that time, member and observer states joined the
OTS without hesitation. It was a geopolitical overhaul
in the region to fill the vacuum that emerged with the
dissolution of the Soviet Union. A strong OTS could be
a balancing power in the region, an intergovernmental
organization that would avoid intervention by non-re-
gional powers. The capacity to protect the member
states’ economic and political interests will boost the
OTS’s further development.
References
Aayda. (2022). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from http://www.aayda.gov.az/en/news/4217/
Aayda. (2022). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from http://www.aayda.gov.az/en/news/4217/
construction-of-horadiz-jabrayil-zangilan-aghband-highway-continues
construction-of-horadiz-jabrayil-zangilan-aghband-highway-continues
Baki Musabay, P. (2022). Turkic World Vision–2040: A Step Forward for the Resilience
Baki Musabay, P. (2022). Turkic World Vision–2040: A Step Forward for the Resilience
of Turkic Cooperation. PERCEPTIONS, Spring-Summer, Volume XXVII, Number
of Turkic Cooperation. PERCEPTIONS, Spring-Summer, Volume XXVII, Number
1, 26-52.
1, 26-52.
Bailes, A. J. K., Dunay, P., Troitskiy, M. (2007). The Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Bailes, A. J. K., Dunay, P., Troitskiy, M. (2007). The Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.
Barman, J. (2023). China’s Belt and Road Initiative: An Analysis. Journal of Contemporary
Barman, J. (2023). China’s Belt and Road Initiative: An Analysis. Journal of Contemporary
Politics, 2(3), 97-102.
Politics, 2(3), 97-102.
Brzezinsky, Z. (2016). The Grand Chessboard: Amerikan Primacy and Its Geostrategic Im-
Brzezinsky, Z. (2016). The Grand Chessboard: Amerikan Primacy and Its Geostrategic Im-
peratives. Basic Book, New York.
peratives. Basic Book, New York.
Demir, C. (2022). The Organization of Turkic States: Implications for the Regional Balance
Demir, C. (2022). The Organization of Turkic States: Implications for the Regional Balance
of Power. Güvenlik Stratejileri Dergisi TDT Özel Sayısı, 39-71.
of Power. Güvenlik Stratejileri Dergisi TDT Özel Sayısı, 39-71.
GovBr. (2019). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://www.gov.br/defesa/pt-br/arquivos/
GovBr. (2019). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://www.gov.br/defesa/pt-br/arquivos/
ensino_e_pesquisa/defesa_academia/cedn/xxi_cedn/5a_geopoliticaa_doa_brasi-
ensino_e_pesquisa/defesa_academia/cedn/xxi_cedn/5a_geopoliticaa_doa_brasi-
la_possibilidadesa_limitacoes.pdf
la_possibilidadesa_limitacoes.pdf
Dodds, K. (2007). Geopolitics: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, New
Dodds, K. (2007). Geopolitics: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, New
York.
York.
Dönmez, G. (2024). Dış Politikada Türkiye Doktrini. Ötüken, İstanbul.
Dönmez, G. (2024). Dış Politikada Türkiye Doktrini. Ötüken, İstanbul.
İlhan, S. (2019). Jeopolitik Güç Odağı Kuramı. Kırmızıkedi, İstanbul.
İlhan, S. (2019). Jeopolitik Güç Odağı Kuramı. Kırmızıkedi, İstanbul.
Marshall, T. (2021). The Power of Geography Ten Maps That Reveal the Future of Our
Marshall, T. (2021). The Power of Geography Ten Maps That Reveal the Future of Our
World. Elliott Thompson, London.
World. Elliott Thompson, London.
Niblett, R. (2024). The New Cold War. How the Contest Between the US and China Shape
Niblett, R. (2024). The New Cold War. How the Contest Between the US and China Shape
Our Century. Atlantic Books, London.
Our Century. Atlantic Books, London.
OBOReurope. (2024). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://www.oboreurope.com/en/
OBOReurope. (2024). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://www.oboreurope.com/en/
beltandroad/
beltandroad/
one-belt/
one-belt/
SCMP. (2017). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://www.scmp.com/news/china/dip-
SCMP. (2017). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://www.scmp.com/news/china/dip-
lomacy-defence/article/2095962/zbigniew-brzezinski-unsung-american-hero-si-
lomacy-defence/article/2095962/zbigniew-brzezinski-unsung-american-hero-si-
no-us?campaign=2095962&module=perpetual_scroll_0&pgtype=article
no-us?campaign=2095962&module=perpetual_scroll_0&pgtype=article
TDT. (2022). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://turkicstates.org/tr/haberler/turk-dev-
TDT. (2022). Retrieved August 8, 2024 from https://turkicstates.org/tr/haberler/turk-dev-
letleri-teskilati-9-zirvesi-semerkant-bildirisi_2679
letleri-teskilati-9-zirvesi-semerkant-bildirisi_2679
Turkic States. (2024). Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://www.turkicstates.org/en/
Turkic States. (2024). Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://www.turkicstates.org/en/
turk-konseyi-hakkinda
turk-konseyi-hakkinda
Turkic States. (2024a). Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://turkicstates.org/assets/doku-
Turkic States. (2024a). Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://turkicstates.org/assets/doku-
man/Nahngilizce1.pdf
man/Nahngilizce1.pdf
Turkic States. (2024b). Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://turkicstates.org/en/haberler/
Turkic States. (2024b). Retrieved July 10, 2024 from https://turkicstates.org/en/haberler/
turkic-world-vision-2040_2396
turkic-world-vision-2040_2396
Ünver, D. (2021). The Turkic World on Rise. Retrieved July 12, 2024 from https://avim.
Ünver, D. (2021). The Turkic World on Rise. Retrieved July 12, 2024 from https://avim.
org.tr/Blog/TURKIC-WORLD-ON-RISE-THE-SUMMIT-OF-THE-ORGANIZA-
org.tr/Blog/TURKIC-WORLD-ON-RISE-THE-SUMMIT-OF-THE-ORGANIZA-
TION-OF-TURKIC-STATES-06-12-2021
TION-OF-TURKIC-STATES-06-12-2021
Ünver, D. (2023). The Analysis of the Organization of Turkic States From a Neo- Functio-
Ünver, D. (2023). The Analysis of the Organization of Turkic States From a Neo- Functio-
nalist Perspective. METU, Ankara.
nalist Perspective. METU, Ankara.
Osman Can Ünver - Organization of Turkic States in the Context of New Asian Geopolitics
