B R I q • Volu me 5 Issue 2 Spring 2024

POEM

Hüseyİn Haydar*

*Hüseyin Haydar, a master Turkish poet of Turkish, was born in 1956 in Yeşilce village
of Trabzon. The poems of the famous poet, who expressed the social struggles of our age
in his poems, have been translated into world languages such as Russian, Arabic, Persian,
English and Chinese. He wrote many articles on literature and art in the national and
international press. From Palestine to Iraq, from Venezuela to Rwanda, from China to Iran,
from Afghanistan to Syria, from Russia to Cuba, he has been on the side of the oppressed
and developing nations that resist imperialism. For fifteen years, he has been publishing his
poems every week in the column of “Poet’s Labour” in Aydınlık Newspaper. In his work titled
“Tablets of the East”, he expressed the human tragedy in Eurasia with an intense historical
depth. He stood against the attacks of U.S. imperialism on humanity. In the meetings he
attended in China, he made an effort to establish the culture, art and poetry part of the One
Belt One Road initiative. During his visit to the Shanghai Writers’ Union, the proposal of Silk
Road Poetry Unions in Eurasia was accepted. Hüseyin Haydar, who is the winner of many
awards, called the poets with a fighting spirit, has published several manifestos, such as “The
New World manifesto for the poets of great humanity”, “The Poet’s Mission in Rising Asia”,
“We Are Establishing the Silk Road Poetry Belt!”, “Call for Boundless Art Union!” etc.

224

How to cite: Haydar, H. (2024). MINUTES OF THE REBELLION: Lumumba! Lumumba!. BRIQ Belt & Road
Initiative Quarterly, 5(2), 224-225.

POEM

MINUTES OF THE REBELLION*
Lumumba! Lumumba!
A wild leap forward… I am naked.
I am the boiling blood of Africa… Here I stand.
I came with bare body… came to be shattered.
I carry the heart of resurrection, I am Lumumba.
You can dissolve my body in acid… I am naked.
But you can never kill my essence… Armored, my spirit is.
Suppressed and squeezed, the flame of honor ignited, I exploded.
The mountain burst, the brain of the era is spewing lava,
I carry the music of the Congo, I am Lumumba.
I bow to the delicate ant of my country, I devour the oppressor,
I turned the Belgian king into a worm, fittingly.
Born in Africa for brotherhood, we are not slaves.
The fox outside made a deal with the local servant inside,
They stole the bread, water, and light of my country,
They spilled the dreams’ blood onto the noble land of Congo.
I ventilated the underground of the dark continent with my hands.
I registered my name in the book of revolutionary martyrs,
With a determined life pulse, I rammed my name to the stone,
I engraved myself, at the forefront, at the very beginning.
Patrice Emery Lumumba, forget this name.
But never forget the name of the collaborator Mobutu.
If a poet has the right to speak, I request a place,
Earthly valor, on behalf of the divine children of Africa.
We took the floor to complete a half-sentence:
Lumumba, a naked arrival, a naked departure.
Stretch your ribs, children, we are late!

*The poem was translated from Turkish into English by Onurcan Balcı and Furkan Çirkin.

225

